CORNELL | 
UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY 





Cornell University 


Bl abrelay 





The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 


There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924029001606 


THE WORKS 


oF 


EPICTETUS., 


CONSISTING OF 


HIS DISCOURSES, IN FOUR BOOKS, THE EN- 
CHIRIDION, AND FRAGMENTS. 


rt 4 TRANSLATION FROM THE GREEK 


BASED ON THAT OF 


ELIZABETH CARTER, 


BY 


THOMAS WENTWORTH HIGGINSON. 


BOSTON: 
LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY. 
1866, 





Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1865, by 
LITTLE, BROWN, AND COMPANY, 
in the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the District of Massachusetts. 


~ 
University Press: Weicn, Bicstow, & Co., 
CAMBRIDGE, 


PREFACE. 


LIZABETH CARTER’S version of Epictetus has 
outlived every English prose translation of its 
day, and has admirably held its ground with read- 
ers. While Marcus Aurelius has had a series of 
English versions, the complete works of Epictetus 
have had but this one, reproduced in four different 
editions. Even of the “ Enchiridion,” or Manual, of 
which there had been at least five different versions 
in England, before her time,—two of which had 
passed respectively through six editions, —I am 
not aware that any later translation has there been 
printed. And the main reason unquestionably is, 
that there was absolutely no work done, at that date, 
of so good a quality. 

Thomas Taylor indeed grudgingly says that this 
translation “is as good as a person ignorant of phi- 
losophy can he supposed to make.”’* But the philos- 
ophy of Epictetus was altogether of the practical sort, 
and quite unlike those cloudy regions of Proclus and 
Plotinus in which Thomas Taylor loved to wander. 
Whatever it was, Elizabeth Carter understood it, and 
rendered it almost too technically ; and if she knew 


* See his translation of Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethicy B. II. 


c. 3, note. 
@ 


iv PREFACE. 


less of philosophy than “the Platonist,” she knew 
Greek a great deal better. There is no reason to 
doubt that she was, as her friend Dr. Johnson de- 
clared, the best, Greek scholar in England of her 
day. She certainly surpassed the contemporary Latin 
translator, Upton, whose edition of Epictetus was 
deservedly the standard one, until that of Schweig- 
Hauser ; and I Have rarely exarainéd a point disputéd 
between het and Schweighiiser, without siding with 
her at-last. After saying this, it is no great stretch 
of hiimility to admit my own inféfiority, and to clair 
only the advantage of writing more than 4 century 
later, and hence with more sidelights and a more 
tHodetn style. 

I hesitated for some time, whether to call this book 
simply a revision of Elizabeth Ca¥ter’s translation, or 
& new one based on hers. The latter alternative was 
finally chosei, legs in order td clairn for myself any 
éredit, of hers, than to save her from sharing any dis- 
credit of mine. The enterprise was bézun simply 
as a revision. But to revise any translation made a 
eentury ago, is like underrunning a telegraphic ca- 
ble: one may inspect a good deal of it, and find but 
trifling repairs neédful; and then one may come to 
‘4 point where a wholly new piete must go in. These 
substitutions multiplied so rapidly, —and evel where 
the changes were slight, they touched words and 
phrases so vital, that the name I have chosen is 
really the least dishonest that could be given. After 
all, it shows the thoroughness of Elizabeth Carter’s 


PREFACE, Vv 


work, that this process of ‘ underrunning ”’ was practi- 
cable at-all. With the loose, dashing, piquant sehook 
of translators who preceded her in that century, as 
L’Estrange and Collier, such an attempt would have 
been absurdity. They are very racy reading, — in- 
deed, a capital study for coarse, colloquial English, — 
but. there is no foundation of accuracy in them. Yet 
the style of Epictetus has a concise and even delicate 
precision which no language but Greek could per- 
haps attain; and to do justice to this without, loss 
of popular intelligibility requires ali Elizabeth Car- 
ter’s faithfulness, combined with an amount of purely 
literary effort which she did not always make. Shea 
apologizes, in her letters, for “the uncouthnass, in 
many places, of a version pretty strictly literal.” 
If she erred on this side, perhaps I have erred in. 
allowing myself a terminology, not more diffuse than 
hers, but more pliant and varied. But after all, 
unless a new English version is to be popularized, 
there seems no use in making it at all. 

Epictetus limits himself strictly te giving a code 
of practical ethics. Not ignoring metaphysics in 
their proper place, he directs his aims elsewhere. 
His essential principles are very simple. All things 
(he holds) receive their character from our judg- 
ment concerning them; all objects, all events, are 
merely semblances or phenomena, to be interpreted 
according to the laws which nature gives us. An 
obvious classification at once occurs; all things are 
either controllable by will, or uncontrollable. If 


vi PREFACE. 


controllable, we may properly exert towards them 
our desire or aversion, though always guardedly and 
moderately. If uncontrollable, they are nothing to 
us, and we are merely to acquiesce, not with resig- 
nation alone, but joyously, knowing that an all-wise 
Father rules the whole.* All success comes, accord- 
ing to Epictetus, from obedience to this rule; all fail- 
ure proceeds from putting a false estimate on the 
phenomena of existence, from trying to control what 
is uncontrollable, or from neglecting what is within 
our power. “Two rules we should have always 
ready, that there is nothing good or evil save in 
the Will; and, that we are not to lead events, but 
to follow them.” (p. 221.) This last is singularly 
identical with the wise Quaker motto, on which Eliz 
abeth Fry based her remarkable practical successes, 
“+o follow, not force, Providence.” 

These simple principles are developed pithily in 
the “ Enchiridion ” or Manual, and more elaborately 
in the Discourses. Neither work was written by 
Epictetus, but both were taken down from his lips. 
The “ Enchiridion” was made the subject, in the sixth 
century, of an elaborate Greek Commentary by Sim- 
plicius, which was translated into English by Stan- 
hope, and was again made the text for a commentary 
longer than itself by Milton’s adversary, Salmasius. 

There is no stain upon the consistent nobleness of 
these Discourses. One can point out some omissions, 
some points where our subtle human organization 

* Compare pages 12, 22, 29, 40, 44, 147, 255, 265, 288, ete. 


= 


PREFACE, vii 


eludes the simple system of Epictetus. But all 
which is here is noble. All the common complaints 
against the Stoic philosophy,— all charges of arro- 
gance, uncharitableness, cold isolation, approval of 
suicide, —are refuted altogether by his clear state- 
ments. ‘ What is the first business of one who stud- 
ies philosophy? To part with self-conceit.” (p. 148.) 
“That we ought not to be angry with the erring,” 
forms the subject of a special chapter. (p. 54.) “All 
is full of beloved ones . . . . by nature endeared to 
each other.” (p. 266.) ‘Who is there whom bright 
and agreeable children do not attract to play and 
creep and prattle with them?” (p. 185.) The phi- 
losopher, “when beaten, must love those who. beat 
him.” (p. 250.) As to suicide, there is a special 
argument against it. (p. 30.) In other places he al- 
Indes to it ironically, in a sort of contempt; or vindi- 
cates Providence by showing that we are not coerced 
even into living on earth, if we do not desire, but even 
in this last resort, our will is free. He also implies, 
more than once, that suicide, which is the cowardice 
of a moment, is after all less blasphemous than the set- 
tled habit of faithless complaint. For this querulous- 
ness is what rouses beyond all things his indignation. 

In his practical examples, he constantly recurs to 
the noblest traits of his famous predecessors, — as 
Socrates, Diogenes, and Zeno; and he also gives us 
glimpses of the finest characters, whose names are 
else unfamiliar, — as Rufus and Euphrates. Indeed, 
all his standards are practical; he denounces, satir- 


Vii PREFACE. 


izes, and riddles through and through all pretenders 
to philosophy, all mere logicians or rhapsodists ; and 
brings all to the test of practical righteousness. In- 
deed, it is a favorite ‘suggestion of his, that no man 
should ever profess to be a philosopher, but that 
each should Jeawe this character to be inferred from 
his actions. “It is not reasonings that are wanted 
now,” he says, “for there are books stuffed full of 
stoical reasonings. What is wanted,then? The man 
who shall apply them; whose actions may ‘bear testi- 
mony to his doctrines. Assume this character for. 
me, that we may no longer make use in the schools 
of the examples of the ancients, but may have some 
examples of our own.’ -(p. 90.) 

‘So far as the ‘scanty record goes, ‘and the testi- 
mony of .contemporaries, Epictetus was himself such 
a man. He was ,probably born at Hierapolis in 
Phrygia,.and he lived at Rome, in the first century-of 
our era, as the slave of Epaphroditus, .a freedman of 
Nero. ‘Origen preserves an anecdote.of Epictetus, that 
when his master once put his leg in the torture, his 
philosophic slave quietly remarked, “ You will break 
my eg”; and when this presently happened, he 
added, inthe same tone, “Did I not tell you so?” 
He.afterwards became free,and lived very frugally at 
Rome, teaching philosophy. Simplicius says that the 
whole furniture of his house consisted of a bed, a 
cooking-vessel, and an earthen lamp; and Lucian 
ridicules a man who bought the latter, after his 
death, in hopes to become.a philosopher by using it. 


PREFACE. ix 


When Domitian banished the philosophers from 
Rome, Epictetus retired to Nicopolis, a city of Epi- 
rns, where he taught as before. He still lived in 
the same frugal way, his only companions being a 
young child, whom he adopted, in the later years 
of his life, because its parents abandoned it, and a 
woman whom he employed as its nurse. He suffered 
from extreme lameness, and, according to his contem- 
porary, Aulus Gellius, composed a couplet to proclaim 
his gratitude to the Gods, in spite of these misfor- 
tunes. “ Epictetus, a slave, maimed in body, an 
Trus in poverty, and favored by the Immortals.” * 
After Hadrian became Emperor (A. D. 117), Epic- 
tetus was treated with favor, but probably did nog 
return to Rome. In these later years of his life, his 
discourses were written down by his disciple Arrian, 
a man of the highest character, both as a philosopher 
and as an historian. But four of the original eight 
hooks remain. ‘The date of Epictetus’s death is en- 
tirely unknown. 

Marcus Aurelins ranked this philosopher with Soe- 
rates, and Origen thought that bis writings had done 
more good than those of Plato. In modern times, 
Niebuhr has said of him, Hpictetus’s greatness can- 
not be questioned, and it is impossible for any person 
of sound mind not to be charmed by his works.” 
I am acquainted with no hook more replete with high. 


* Aulus Gellins, Noctes Attice, B. II. c. 18. Salmasius, however, 
doubts the genuineness of this passage. (Com., ed. 1640, p.3.) The 
game epigram has been attributed to Leonidas of Tarentum. 


x PREFACE. 


conceptions of the Deity, and noble aims for man; 
nor do I know any in which the inevitable laws of 
retribution are more grandly stated, with less of 
merely childish bribery or threatening. It is pa- 
thetic to see good Mrs. Carter apologizing for this 
elevation of thought as if it were a weakness, and to 
find Merivale censuring it as “a low and popular 
view” to represent vice as its own punishment and 
virtue as its own reward. It is not, however, my ob- 
ject to vindicate these plain principles, but to let 
them speak for themselves, with as much as possible 
of their original clearness. 

It has not seemed to me strange, but very natural, 
to pass from camp life to the study of Epictetus. 
Where should a student find contentment in enforced 
withdrawal from active service, if not in “ the still 
air of delightful studies’? There seemed a special 
appropriateness, also, in coming to this work from a 
camp of. colored soldiers, whose great exemplar, 
Toussaint l’Ouverture, made the works of this his 
fellow-slave a favorite manual. Moreover, the return 
of peace seems a fitting time to call anew the public: 
attention to those eternal principles on which alone 
true prosperity is based; and, in a period of increas- 
ing religious toleration, to revive the voice of one 
who bore witness to the highest spiritual truths, ere 


the present sects were born. 
T. W. H. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


THE DISCOURSES. 


Arrun To Lucius GELLius . : ‘ . : . 1 


BOOK I. 
Cuarrer 
I. Of the Things which are, and the Things which are not, 
in our own Power . - 8 
I. In what Manner, upon every Oacetion: oe nicer our 
' Character . : . . 7. 
III. How, from the Doctrine that God is the Father of Man- 
kind, we may proceed to its Consequences . « 12 
IV. Of Progress . . . < 2 8 . 18 
V. Concerning the iReasteactes . . 7 . - VW 
VI. Of Providence . « 18 
VII. Of the Use of the feeas of Right Rebodiag . 23 
VIN. That Logical Subtleties are not safe to the Wninstrueted 27 
IX. How, from the Doctrine of our Relationship to God, we 
are to deduce its Consequences . . - 28 
X. Concerning those who séek Preferment at Rome . 33 
XI. Of Natural Affection. . : . . : - 34 
XII. Of Contentment . 40 
XTII. How Everything may te cacreenisd to the Divine as 
ceptance . . 44 


XIV. That all Things are nae the Divine Supecrision . 45 
XV. What Philosophy promises . . . . « 47 
XVI. Of Providence. . . . 48 
XVI. That the Art of assuage is nena . . - 52 
XVIL. That we ought not to he Angry with the Erring 54 
XIX. Of the right Treatment of Tyrants . < . . 57 
XX. In what Manner Reason contemplates itself .  . 61 
XXI. Of the Desire of Admiration . . . . - 68 


xii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


XXII. Of General Principles 64 
XXIII. Against Epicurus . : 66 
XXIV. How we ought to struggle with Difficnlties : 67 

XXV. On the same Subject . ; ° : . 70 
XXVI. What the Rule of Lifeis . 74 

XXVII. Of the varied Appearances of Things to the Mind, aa 
what Means are at Hand by which to regulate them 76 

XXVIII. That we ought not to he Angry with Mankind. What 
Things are little, what great, among Men 79 
XXIX. Of Courage . ° . 83 
KXX. Weapons ready for difficult Gauss 91 

~ BOOK II 

, iL That Conrage is not inconsistent with Caution 93 
Il. Of Tranquillity . : : 7 : ’ 98 

IIL Concerning such as recommend Persans to the Philos- 
ophers ’ , > lol 
IV. Concerning a Man aha iad been cule of anita 102 

Y. How Nobleness of Mind may be consistent with Pra- 
dence . . ‘ ’ . . 104 
VI. Of Circumstances ° ° A ‘ - 108 
VIL. Of Divination . 7 » lll 
VII. Wherein consists the Basence of Goes . » 118 

IX. That some Persons, failing to fulfil what the Character 
of. a Man implies, assume that of a Philosopher . 17 

X. How we may infer the Duties.of Life from its nomingl 
Functions . . : . + 120 
XI. The Beginning of Philos . . A - 124 
XII. Of Disputation . ‘ . . 7 - 127 
XI Of Anxiety . . . . “ 130 
XIV. Concerning Naso... 135 

XV. Concerning those who obstinately aot: in sunt 
they have determined . . . 139 

XVI. That we do not stndy to make use af the entablished 
Principles concerning Good and Evil . 7 - 141 

XVII. How to apply General Principles to Particular Cases 148 

XVIII. How the Semblances.of Things are-to be combated . 153 
XIX. Concerning those who embrace Philosophy’ a in 

Words ‘3 x 7 ‘s * - 157 

XX. Concerning the Hpisursans and Academics 162 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. x1 
XXI. Of Inconsistency . . . . . ; - 168 
XXII. Of Friendship. . : . . » 7 
XXIII. Of Elequence . . ‘ . . : - 197 
XXIV. Concerning a Person whom he treated mia Disregard 188 
XXV. That Logic is necessary . . . . . - 188 
XXVI. What is the Test of Error. . . . 188 
BOOK III. 
I. Of Personal Adornment . 2 . . : - 190 
II. In what a well-trained Man should exercise himself; 
and that we neglect the principal Things . - 197 
Til. What is the chief Concern of a good Man; and in what 
we chiefly ought to train ourselves . . - 200 
IV. Concerning one who made himself co, conspicn- 
, ‘ous im the Theatre ; : s - 208 
V.. Concerning those who plead Bickuess: . * 205 
VI. Miscellaneous . . 7 : . 207 
VII. Concerning a certain Grane who was an ph astan 209 
VII. How we are ‘to exercise ourselves against the Sem- 
: blances of Things . , . . . 214 
IX. Concerning a certain Orator who was going to Tati on 
a Lawsuit . : : 5 : - 215: 
X.-In what Manner we ali to bear Siskneeg 7 - 218 
XI. Miscellaneous . Pe A > : . . 221 
XI. Of Training . ‘ - 222 
XIII. What Solitude is; and wits a Solitary Potion é - 225 
XIV. Miscellaneons . - «228 
XV. That Everything is to he isidertaked with Chenusper 
tion. . 230 
XVI. That Caution shoald be jaa as to personal Panihene 282 
XVII. Of Providence . . . . 234 
XVIU. That we ought not to be ainviaed a any News that i is 
brought us. . . 235 
XIX. What is the comparative Condition of the Philosopher 
and of the Crowd . : . ‘ 236 
XX. That some Advantage may be aa cio every ont- 
ward Circumstance . 237 
XXI. Concerning those who readily set up for Sophists 240 
XXII. Of the Cynic Philosophy . . . 248 
XXIII. Concerning such as read or dispute ateatanouly 259 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


XXIV. That we onght not to he affected hy Things not in our 
own Power . 3 A + 265 
XXV. Concerning those who waver in their Purtie . 282 
XXXVI. Concerning those who are in dread of Want - 284 

BOOK IV. 

I. Of Freedom . ; . : ; . . » 291 
I. Of Complaisance. . : . . 817 
Ill. What Things are to he exchaned for Others . 318 
IV. Concerning those who earnestly desire a Life of Repose 320 
V. Concerning the Qnarrelsome and Ferocions . 327 
VI. Concerning those who are ar at being pitied . 333 
VII. Of Fearlessness . . . . 339 
VII. Concerning such as helly & assume the shilosaphig Dice 346 
IX. Concerning a Person who had grown immodest . . 352 
_ X. What Things we are to despise, and what chiefly to valne 355 
RisvOf Parity ais (os. sen Ga = a) ek can Gre BBO 
XII. Of taking Pains . . . . . . - 865 
XIII. Concerning such as are too Communicative . - 868 
THE ENCHIRIDION ee . . . . - 873 
FRAGMENTS . .- . . . 2... 401 
INDEX . . . . . . . : 5 - 435 


LIST OF BOOKS CONSULTED. 


[or the Complete Works.] 


1. Epicteti que supersunt Dissertationes ab Arriano collecta, 
+ «+ « illustravit Joannes Uptonus, Prebend. Rossensis. Londini, 
1741. 2 vols. 8yo. 

2. Epicteti Dissertationum libri iv... . . post J. Uptoni aliorum- 
qne curas, edidit J. Schweighiuser. Lipsiz, 1799, 1800. 5 vols. in 
6. 8vo. 

3. The Works of Epictetns, ... . translated from the original 
Greek, by Mrs. Elizabeth Carter... .. London, 1758. 4to. [2d 
ed., 2 vols., 12mo, 1759, 3d ed., 2 vols., 12mo, 1768. 4th ed., 
2 vols., 8vo, 1804.} ‘ f 

4... . . Epicteti Dissertationes ab Arriani literis mandate..... 
[Didot, Bib. Gree.] Parisiis, 1840. 8yvo. 


[For the Enckiridion.] 


5. Simplicii Commentarius in Enchiridion Epicteti, .... cam 
versione Hier. Wolfii et Cl. Salmasii animadversionibus. .... 
Lugduni Batavorum, 1640. 4to. 

6. The most excellent Morals of Epictetus made English in a Poet- 
ical Paraphrase, by Ellis Walker, M. A. London, 1692. 12mo. 
[Also, London, 1697, 1701, 1709, 1716, 1732; Boston, Mass., 1863, 
from the edition of 1716. ,The two latter are those which I have 


seen.] 
7. Epictetus, his Morals, with Simplicius, his Commentary. Made 
English from the Greek by George Stanhope. . . . . London, 1694. 


12mo. [Also, London, 1700, 1704, 1721, 1741, 1750.] 

8. Epicteti Manuale. ... . Grece et Latine in ugnm tyronum 
accommodati. .... illustravit Joseph Simpson. LEditio Quarta. 
Londini, 1758. 8vo. 

9. Epicteti Enchiridion Grace et Latine .. . . cnravit Chr. 

f 


Xvi LIST OF BOOKS CONSULTED. 


Gottl. Heyne. Altera Editio. Varsavie, 1776. 18mo. [A previ- 
ous edition at Dresden, 1756.] 

10. Manuale di Epicteto . . . . secondo la Versione del Rev. 
Padre Pagnini. [Opere di G. D. Bomagnosi. Vol. I. Part 2.] 
Milano, 1844.. 8vo. 





[The following English versions I find mentioned in Adam Clarke’s 
‘* Account of English Translations of Greek and Roman Classics.” 
London, 1806 ;—~ but I have not_met with them. 

1. The Manual of Epictetus, translated ont of Greek into French, 
and now into English, compared with two Latin translations, .. . . 
by Jas. Sandford. London, 1567. 8vo. 

2. The Life and Philosophy of Epictetus .... rendered into 
English by John Davies. London, 1670. 8vo. 

3. The Manual of Epictetus the Philosopher, translated from the 
original Greek by Wm. Bond. London, 1780. 12mo. 

Ellis Walker, in his preliminary life of Epictetus, speaks of still 
another English translation, by Healey; also of French versions by 
Du Vair and Boilean. There is also a critical edition of the Enchi- 
ridion, by Coray, with a French translation (Paris, 1826), which I 
have not seen.] 


THE 


DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


ARRIAN TO LUCIUS GELLIUS 


WISHETH ALL HAPPINESS. 


NEITHER composed the Discourses of Epictetus 

in such a manner as things of this nature are 
commonly composed, nor did I myself produce them 
to public view, any more than I composed them. 
But whatever sentiments I heard from his own 
mouth, the very same I endeavored to set down in 
the very same words, so far as possible, and to pre- 
serve as memorials for my own use, of his manner 
of thinking, and freedom of speech. 

These Discourses are such as one person would 
naturally deliver from his own thoughts, extempore, 
to another; not such as he would prepare to be read 
by numbers afterwards. Yet, notwithstanding this, I 
cannot tell how, without either my consent or knowl- 
edge, they have fallen into the hands of the public. 
But it is of little consequence to me, if I do not ap- 
pear an able writer, and of none to Epictetus, if any 
one treats his Discourses with contempt; since it was 
very evident, even when he uttered them, that he 
aimed at nothing more than to excite his hearers to 
yirtue. If they produce that one effect, they have in 

1 


2 ARRIAN TO LUCIUS GELLIUS 


them what, I think, philosophical discourses ought 
to have. And should they fail of it, let the readers 
however be assured, that when Epictetus himself 
pronounced them, his audience could not help being 
affected in the very manner he intended they should. 
If by themselves they have less efficacy, perhaps it is 
my fault, or perhaps it is unavoidable. 
Farewell. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


BOOK I. 


CHAPTER I. 


OF THE THINGS WHICH ARE, AND THE THINGS WHICH 
ARE NOT IN OUR OWN POWER. 


F other faculties, you will find no one that con: 
templates, and consequently approves or disap- 
proves itself. How far does the proper sphere of 
grammar extend? As far as the judging of lan- 
guage. Of music? As far as the judging of melody. 
Does either of them contemplate itself, then? By no 
means. 

Thus, for instance, when you are to write to your 
friend, grammar will tell you what to write; but 
whether you are to write to your friend at all, or no, 
grammar will not tell you. Thus music, with regard 
to tunes; but whether it be proper or improper, at 
any particular time, to sing or play, music will not 
tell you. 

What will tell, then? 

That which contemplates both itself and all other 
things. 

And what is that? 

The Reasoning Faculty ; for that alone is found to 
consider both itself, its powers, its value, and like- 


4 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


wise all the rest. For what is it-else that says, gold 
is beautiful ; for the gold itself does not speak? vi- 
dently that faculty, which judges of the appearances 
of things. What else distinguishes music, grammar, 
the other faculties, proves their uses, and shows their 
proper occasions ? 

Nothing but this. 

As it was fit then, this most excellent and superior 
faculty alone, a right use of the appearances of things, 
the gods have placed in our own power ; but all other 
matters, they have not placéd in our power. What, 
was it because they would not? I rather think, that 
if they could, they had granted us these too; but 
they certainly could not. For, placed upon earth, 
and confined to such a body, and to such compan- 
ions, how was it possible that, in these respects, wé 
should not be hindered by things without us ? 

But what says Zeus? “O Kpictetus, if it were pos- 
sible, I had made this little body and property of 
thine free, and not liable to hindrance. But now do 
not mistake: it is not thy own, but only a finer mix- 
ture of clay. Since, then, I could not give thee this, 
I have given thee a certain portion of myself; this 
faculty of exerting the powers of pursuit and avoid- 
ance, of desire and aversion, and, in a word, the use 
of the appearances of things. Taking care of this 
point, and making what is thy own to consist in this, 
thou wilt never be restrained, never be hindered ; 
thou wilt not groan, wilt not tomplain, wilt not flat- 
ter any one. How, then! Do all these advantages 
seem small to thee? Heaven forbid! Let them-suf: 
fice thee then, and thank the gods.” 

But now, when it isin our power to take care of 
one thing, and to apply to one, we choose rather to 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 5 


take oare of many, and to encumber ourselves with 
many; body, property, brother, friend, child, and 
slave; and, by this multiplicity of encumbrances, we 
are burdened and weighed down. Thus, when the 
weather doth not happen to be fair for sailing, we sit 
in distress and gaze out perpetually. Which way is 
the wind ?—-North.-—- What do we want of that? 
When will the west blow ?-— When it pleases, friend, 
or when Aujolus pleases; for Zeus has not made you 
dispenser of the winds, but Aolus. 

What then is to be done ? 

To make the best of what is in our power, and take 
the rest as it occurs. 

And how does it occur ? 

As it pleases God, 

What, then, must I be the only one to lose my head ? 

Why, would you have all the world, then, lose 
their heads for your consolation? Why are not you 
willing to stretch out your neck, like Lateranus,* 
when he was commanded by Nero to be beheaded ? 
For, shrinking a, little after receiving a weak blow, 
-he stretched it out again. And before this, when 
Epaphroditus,t the freedman of Nero, interrogated 


* Plantins Laterangs, a Consul elect, was put to death by the 
command of Nero, for being privy to the conspiracy of Piso. His 
execution was so sudden, that he was not permitted to take leave of 
his wife and children; but was hurried into a place appropriated to 
the punishment of slayes, and there killed by the hand of the tribune 
Statius, He suffered in obstinate silence, and without making any 
reproach to Stating, who was concerned in the same plot for which he 
himself was punished. Tagcrrus, Ann. xv. 9. 60.—C. 

tEpaphroditus was the master of requests and freedman of Nero, 
and the master of Epictetus. He assisted Nero in killing himself; for 
which he was condemned to death by Domitian. Suxrowrva in Vita 

‘Neronis, ¢. 49; Domit. c. 14. —Q, 


6 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


him about the conspiracy: “If I have a mind to say 
anything,” replied he, “I will tell it to your master.’’’ 
What resource have we then upon such occasions ? 
Why, what else but to distinguish between what is 
ours, and what not ours; what is right, and what is 
wrong. I must die, and must I die groaning too ?— 
Be fettered. Must I be lamenting too ?— Exiled. 
And what hinders me, then, but that ] may go smil- 
ing, and cheerful, and serene ?—“ Betray a secret.” 
—I will not betray it; for this is in my own power. 
— “Then I will fetter you.”—- What do you say, 
man? Fetter me? You will fetter my leg; but 
not Zeus himself can get the better of my free will. 
“TY will throw you into prison: I will behead that 
paltry body of yours.” Did I ever tell you, that I 
alone had a head not liable to be cut off?— These 
things ought philosophers to study; these ought they 
daily to write ; and in these to exercise themselves. 
Thraseas * used to say, “I had rather be killed to- 
day, than bataished to-morrow.” But how did Ru- 
fust answer him? “If you prefer it as a heavier 
misfortune, how foolish a preference! If as a light- 
er, who has put it in your power? Why do not you 
study to be contented with what is allotted you?” 
Well, and what said Agrippinus,t upon this ac- 


* Thraseas Petus, a Stoic philosopher, put to death by Nero. He 
was husband of Atria, so well known by that beautiful epigram in 
Martial. The expresston of Tacitus concerning him is remarkable: 
«: After the murder of so many excellent persons, Nero at last formed 
a desire of cutting off virtue itself, by the execution of Thraseas 
Pretus and Bareas Soranus.” Ann. xvi. c. 21.-~C. 

+ Rufus was a Tuscan, of the equestrian order, and a Stoic philos- 
opher. When Vespasian hanished the other philosophers, Rufus was 
alone excepted. —C. 

$ Agrippinus was banished by Nero, for no other crime than the. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 7 


count? “TJ will not be a hindrance to myself.” 


‘Word was brought him, “ Your cause is trying in the 


senate.” —‘ Good luck attend it; but it is eleven 
o’clock” (the hour when he used to exercise before 
bathing): “Let us go to our exercise.” This being 
over, a messenger tells him, “ You are condemned.” 
To banishment, says he, or to death? “To banish- 
ment.’ — What of my estate? —“It is not taken 
away.” Well then, let us go as far as Aricia,* and 
dine there. 

This it is to have studied what ought to be stud- 
ied; to have placed our desires and aversions above 
tyranny and above chance. I must die: if instanily, 
I will die instantly; if in a short time, I will dine 
first; and when the hour comes, then I will die. 
How? As becomes one who restores what is not his 
own. 


CHAPTER II. 


IN WHAT MANNER, UPON EVERY OCCASION, TO PRESERVE 
OUR CHARACTER. 


O a reasonable creature, that alone is insupporta- 

a ble which is unreasonable; but everything rea- 
sonable may be supported. Stripes are not naturally 
insupportable. —‘‘ How so?’?—See how the Spar- 
tans ¢ bear whipping, after they have learned that it 


unfortunate death of his father, who had been causelessly killed by the 
command of Tiberius; and this had furnished a pretence for accusing 
him of hereditary disloyalty. Tacirus, Ann. xvi. c. 28, 29.—C. 

* Aricia, a town about sixteen miles from Rome, which lay in his 
road to banishment. — C. 

t The Spartans, to make a trial of the fortitude of their children, 
used to have them publicly whipped at the altar of Diana; and often 


8 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


is a reasonable thing, Hanging is not insupport 
able; for, as soon as a man has taken it into his 
head that it is reasonable, he goes and hangs himself, 
In short we shall find by observation, that no crea- 
ture is oppressed so much by anything, as by what is 
unreasonable ; nor, on the other hand, attracted to 
anything so strongly, as to what is reasonable. 

But it happens that different things are reason- 
able and unreasonable, as well as good and bad, 
advantageous and disadvantageous, to different per- 
sons. ‘On this account, chiefly, we stand in need of 
a liberal education, to teach us to adapt the precon- 
ceptions of reasonable and unreasonable to particular 
cases, conformably to nature. But to judge of reap 
sonable and unreasonable, we make use not only of a 
due estimation of things without us, but of what 
relates to each person’s particular character. Thus, 
it is reasonable for one man to submit to a menial 
office, who considers this only, that if he does not 
submit to it, he shall be whipt, and lose his dinner, 
but that if he does, he has nothing hard or disagree- 
able to suffer; whereas to another it appears insup- 
portable, not only to submit to such an office himself, 
but to respect any one else who does. If you ask 
me, then, whether you shall do this menial office or 
not, I will tell you, it is a more valuable thing to get 
a dinner, than not; and a greater disgrace to be 
whipt, than not te be whipt ;—so that, if you meas- 
ure yourself by these things, go and do your office. 

“ Ay, but this is not suitable to my character.” 

It is you who are to consider that, not I; for it is 


with so much severity, that they expired, The hoys supported 
this exercise with so much constancy as never to cry ont, nor even 
groan. — C, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETYS. 9 


you who know yourself, what value you set upon 
yourself, and at what rate you sell yourself; for dif- 
ferent people sell themselves at different prices, 

Hence Agrippinus* when Florus was considering 
whether he should go to Nero’s shows, and perform 
some part in them himself, bid him go. —-“ But why 
do not you go then?” says Florus. ‘“ Because,’ 
replied Agrippinus, “I do not deliberate about it.” 
For he who once sets himself about such consid- 
erations, and goes to calculating the worth of exter- 
nal things, approaches very near to those who forget 
their own character. For, why do you ask me 
whether death or life be the more eligible? I an- 
swer, life. Pain or pleasure? I answer, pleasure. 
— “ But if J do not act a part, I shall lose my head.” 
——Go and. act it then, but I will not,—“ Why?” — 
Because you esteem yourself only as one thread of 
many that make up the piece. —“ What then?” — 
You have nothing to care for, but how to be like the 
rest of mankind, as one thread desires not to be dis- 
tinguished from the others. But I would be the 
purple,} that small and brilliant part, which gives a 
lustre and beauty to the rest. Why do you bid me 
resemble the multitude then? At that rate, how 
shall I be the purple ? 

This Priscus Helvidius ¢ too saw, and acted accord- 


* Nero was remarkably fond of theatrical entertainments; and 
nsed to introduce npon the stage the descendants of noble families, 
whom want had rendered venal. Tacrrus, Ann. xiv. ¢. 14.-—{. 

+ An allnsion to the purple border, which distinguished the dress 
of the Roman nobility. — C. 

t Helvidius Priscus was no less remarkable for his learning and 
philosophy, than for the squctity of his manners and the love of his 
country. He behaved however with too much haughtiness on several 


10 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


ingly ; for when Vespasian had sent to forbid his go- 
ing to the Senate, he answered, “It is in your power 
to prevent my continuing a senator ; but while I am 
one, I must go.” —“ Well then, at least be silent 
there.” —“ Do not ask my opinion and I will be 
silent.” — “ But I must ask it.” —‘“ And I must 
speak what appears to me to be right.” —“ But if 
you do, I will put you to death.” — “‘ When did I ever 
tell you that I was immortal? You will do your 
part, and Imine: itis yours to kill and mine to die 
intrepid ; yours to banish, mine to depart untroubled.” 

What good, then, did Priscus do, who was but a 
single person? Why, what good does the purple do 
to the garment? What, but to be beautiful in itself, 
and to set a good example to the rest? Another, 
perhaps, if in such circumstances Cesar had forbid- 
den his going to the Senate, would have answered, 
“Tam obliged to you for excusing me.” But such 
a one he would not have forbidden to go; well know- 
ing, that he would either sit like a statue, or, if he 
spdke, would ‘say what he knew to be agreeable to 
Cxsar, and would overdo it, by adding still more. 

Thus acted even a wrestler, who was in danger of 
death, unless he consented to an ignominious ampu- 
tation. His brother, who was a philosopher, coming 
to him, and saying “ Well, brother, what do you de- 
sign todo? Let us cut away ibis part, and return 
again to the field.” He refused, and courageously 
died. 

When it was asked, whether he acted thus as a 
wrestler, or a philosopher? I answer, as a man, said 


occasions, to Vespasian, who sentenced him to death with great reluc- 
tance, and even forbade the execution, when it was toolate. Surron. 
in Vesp. § 15.—C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 11 


Epictetus ; but as a man who had been proclaimed a 
champion at the Olympic games; who had been used 
to such places, and not exercised merely in the school 
of Bato.* Another would have had his very head cut 
off, if he could have lived without it. This is that 
regard to character, so powerful with those who are 
accustomed to introduce it, from their own breasts, 
into their deliberations. 

“ Come now, Epictetus, take off your beard.” + —If 
J am a philosopher, I answer, I will not take it off. — 
“Then I will take off your head.” —If that will do 
you any good, take it off. 

It was asked, How shall each of us perceive what 
belongs to his character? Whence, replied Epicte- 
tus, does a bull, when the lion approaches, alone rec- 
ognize his own qualifications, and expose himself 
alone for the whole herd? It is evident, that with 
the qualifications, occurs, at the same time, the con- 
sciousness of being indued with them. And in the 
same manner, whoever of us hath such qualifications, 
will not be ignorant of them. But neither is a bull, 
nor a gallant-spirited man, formed all at once. We 
are to exercise, and qualify ourselves, and not to run 
rashly upon what doth not concern us. 

Only consider at what price you sell your own free 
will, O man! if only that you may not sell it for 
a trifle. The highest greatness and excellence per- 
haps seem to belong to others, to such as Socrates. 
Why then, as we are born with a like nature, do 
not all, or the greater number, become such as he? 


* Bato was a famous master of the Olympic exercises. —~ C. 

t Domitian ordered all the philosophers to be banished. To avoid 
this inconvenience, those wbo bad a mind to disguise their profession, 
took off their heards. — C. 


12 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Why, are all horses swift? Are all dogs sagacious? 
What then, because my. gifts are humble, shall I neg- 
lect all care of myself? Heaven forbid! Epictetus 
may not surpass Socrates; granted: but could I 
overtake him, it might be enough for me. I shall 
never be Milo, and yet Ido not neglect my body ; 
nor Croesus, and yet I do not neglect my property ; 
nor should we omit any effort, from a despair of arriv- 
ing at the highest. 


CHAPTER III. 


HOW, FROM THE DOCTRINE THAT GOD IS THE FATHER OF 
MANKIND, WE MAY PROCEED TO ITS CONSEQUENCES. 


F a person could be persuaded of this principle as 
A he ought, that we are all originally descended from 
God, and that he is the father of men and gods; I 
conceive he never would think of himself meanly or 
ignobly. Suppose Cesar were to adopt you, there 
would be no bearing your haughty looks; and will 
you not feel ennobled on knowing yourself to be the 
son of God? Yet, in fact, we are not ennobled. But 
having two things united in our composition, a body 
in common with the brutes, and reason in common 
with the gods, many ineline to this unhappy and mor- 
tal kindred, and only some few to that which is happy 
and divine. And, as of necessity every one must treat 
each particular thing, according to the notions he 
forms about it; so those few, who suppose that they 
are made for faith and honor, and a wise use of 
things, will never think meanly or ignobly concern- 
ing themselves. But with the multitude the case is 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 13 


contrary; “For what am I? A poor contemptible 
man, with this miserable flesh of mine?” Miserable 
indeed. But you have likewise something better 
than this poor flesh. Why then, overlodking that, do 
you pine away in attention to this? 

By means of this [animal] kindred, some of us, 
deviating towards it, become like wolves, faithless, 
and crafty, and mischievous ; others, like lions, wild, 
arid savagé, and ulitamed; but most of us foxes, 
and disgraceful even among brutes. For what else 
is a slanderous and ill-natured man, but a fox, or 
something yet more wretched and mean? Watch 
and take heed then, that you do not sink thus low. 


CHAPTER IV 
OF PROGRESS. 


LTE who is entering oii a state of progress, having 

learnt from the philosophers, that good should 
be sought and evil shunned; and having learnt too, 
that prosperity and peace are no otherwise attainable 
by man, than in not missing what he seeks, nor in 
curting what he shuns; such 4 one removes totally 
from himself and banishes all wayward desire, and 
shuns only those things over which he can have con- 
trol. For if he should attempt to shun those things 
over which he has no control, he knows that he must 
sometimes incur that which he shuns, and be unhap- 
py. Now if virtue promises happiness, prosperity, 
and peace; then progress in virtue is certainly pro- 
gress in each of these. For to whatever point the per- 


14 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


fection of anything absolutely brings us, progress is 
always an approach towards it. 

How happens it then, that .when we confess virtue 
to be such, yet we seek, and make an ostentatious 
show of progress in other things? What is the busi- 
ness of virtue ? 

A life traly prosperous. 

Who is in a state of progress then? He who has 
best studied Chrysippus?* Why, does virtue consist 
in having read Chrysippus through? Ifso, progress is 
confessedly nothing else than understanding a great 
deal of Chrysippus; otherwise we confess virtue to 
consist in one thing, and declare progress, which is 
an approach to it, to be quite another thing. 

This person, they say, is already able to under- 
stand Chrysippus, by himself. —“ Certainly, sir, you 
have made a vast improvement!” What improve- 
ment? Why do you delude him? Why do you 
withdraw him from a sense of his real needs? Why 
do not you show him the real function of virtue, that 
he may know where to seek progress ?—— Seek it 
there, O! unfortunate, where your work lies. And 
where doth your work lie? In learning what to seek- 
and what to shun, that you may neither be disap- 
pointed of the one, nor incur the other ; in practising 
how to pursue and how to avoid, that you may not be 
liable to fail; in practising intellectual assent and 
doubt, that you may not be liable to be deceived. 
These are the first and most necessary things. But 
if you merely seek, in trembling and lamentation, to 


* Chrysippus was regarded as the highest authority among the 
later Stoics; but not one of his seven hundred volumes has come 
down to posterity. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. | 15 


keep away all possible ills, what real progress have 
you made ? 

Show me then your progress in this point. As if I 
should say to a wrestler, Show me your muscle ; and 
he should answer me, “ See my dumb-bells.” Your 
dumb-bells are your own affair: I desire-to see the 
effect of them. 

“Take the treatise on the active powers, and see 
how thoroughly I have perused it.” 

I do not inquire into this, O! slavish man; but 
how you exert those powers; how you manage your 
desires and aversions, how your intentions and pur- 
poses; how you meet events, whether in accordance 
with nature’s laws, or contrary to them. If in ac- 
cordance, give me evidence of that, and J will say 
you improve: if the contrary, go your way, and not 
only comment on these treatises, but write such your- 
self, and yet what service will it do you? Do not 
you know that the whole volume is sold for five de- 
narii? Doth he who comments upon it, then, value 
himself at more than that sum? Never make your 
life to consist in one thing and yet seek progress in 
another. 

Where is progress, then ? 

If any of you, withdrawing himself from externals, 
turns to his own will, to train, and perfect, and ren- 
der it conformable to nature; noble, free, unre- 
strained, unhindered, faithful, humble; if he hath 
learnt, too, that whoever desires or shuns things be- 
yond his own power, cau neither be faithful nor free, 
but must necessarily take his chance with them, 
must neccssarily too be subject to others, to such as 
can procure or prevent what he desires or shuns; if, 
rising in the morning, he observes and keeps to these 


16 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


rules; bathes regularly, eats frugally; and to every 
subject of action, applies the same fixed principles, 
if a racer to racing, if an orator to oratory; this 
is he, who truly makes progréss; this is be, who hatli 
not labored in vain. But if he is wholly intent on 
tedding books, and hath labored that point only, and 
travelled for that; I bid him go home immediately, 
and do his daily duties; sincé that which he sought 
is nothing. 

The only real thing is, to study how to rid life of 
lamentation, and complaint, and Alas! and Iam tm- 
done, and misfortune, and failure; and to learn what 
death, what exile, what a prison, what poison is; 
that he may be able to say in 4 prison, like Socrates, 
“My dear Orito, if it thus pleases the gods, thus let 
it be’; and not, “ Wretched old man, have I kept 
my gray hairs for this!”” [Do you ask] who speaks 
thus? Do you think I quote some mean and des- 
picable petson? Is it not Priatt who says it? Is 
it not Cdipus? Nay, how inany kings say it? 
For what else is tragedy, but the dramatized suffer- 
ings of men, bewildered by an admiration of exter- 
nals? If one were to be taught by fictions, that 
things beyond our will are nothing to us, I should 
réjolcé in such 4 fiction, by which I might live pros- 
perous and serene. But what you wish for, it is your 
business to consider. 

Of what service, then, is Chrysippus to us ? 

To teach you, that those things are not false, on 
which true prosperity and peace depend. “ Take my 
books, and you will see, how true and conformable to 
nature those things are, which give me peace.” How 
great a happiness! And how great the benefactor, 
who shows the way! To Triptolemus all men have 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 17 


raised temples and altars, because he gave us a 
milder kind of food: but to him who hath discovered, 
and brought to light, and communicated the truth to 
all;* the means, not of living merely, but of living 
well ; who among you ever raised an altar or a tem- 
ple, or dedicated a statue, or who worships God in his 
name? We offer sacrifices in memory of those who 
have given us corn and the vine; and shall we not 
give thanks to God, for those who have nurtured 
such fruit in the human breast; even the truth which 
makes us blessed ? 


CHAPTER V. 
CONCERNING THE ACADEMICS.T 


T is said that there are those who will oppose very 
evident truths, and yet it is not easy to finda 
reason which may persuade such an one to alter 
his opinion. This may arise neither from his own 
strength, nor from the weakness of his teacher; but 
when a man becomes obstinate in error, reason can- 
not always reach him. 

Now there are two sorts of obstinacy: the one, 
of the intellect; the other, of the will. A man may 
obstinately set himself not to assent to evident truths, 
nor to quit the defence of contradictions. We all 
dread a bodily paralysis; and would make use of 
every contrivance to avoid it: but none of us is trou- 
bled, about a paralysis of the soul. And yet, indeed, 


* Triptolemus was said to have introduced agriculture and vege- 
table food among men, under the guidance of Ceres. — H. 
+ The New Academy denied the existence of any nniversal 
truths. —H. 
2 


18 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


even with regard to the soul, when a person is so af- 
fected as not to apprehend or understand anything, 
we think him in a sad condition ; but where the emo- 
tions of shame and modesty are under an absolute 
paralysis, we go so far as even to call this strength 
of mind! 

Are you certain that you are awake?—“I am 
not,” replies such a person, “for neither am I certain 
when in dreaming I appear to myself to be awake.” 
Is there no difference, then, between: these appear- 
ances ?— “None.” Shall I argue with this man any 
longer? For what steel or what caustic can I apply, 
to make him sensible of his paralysis? If he is sen- 
sible of it, and pretends not to be so, he is even worse 
than dead. He sees not his inconsistency, or, seeing 
it, holds to the wrong. He moves not, makes no 
progress } he rather falls back. His sense of shame 
is gone; his reasoning faculty is not gone, but bru- 
talized. Shall I call this strength of mind? By no 
means: unless we allow it to be such in the vilest 
debauchees, publicly to speak and act out their worst 
impulses. 


CHAPTER VI. 
OF PROVIDENCE. 


ROM every event. that happens in the world it is 
easy to celebrate Providence, if a person hath 

but these two qualities in himself; a faculty of con- 
sidering what happens to each individual, and a 
grateful temper. Without the first, he will not per- 
ceive the usefulness of things which happen; and 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 19 


without the other, he will not be thankful for them. 
If God had made colors, and had not made the fac- 
ulty of seeing them, what would have been their use ? 
None. On the other hand, if he had made the faculty 
of observation, without objects to observe, what would 
have been the use of that? None. Again; if he had’ 
formed both the faculty and the objects, but had not 
made light? Neither in that case would they have 
been of any use. 

Who is it then that hath fitted each of these to the 
other? Who is it that hath fitted the sword to the 
scabbard, and the scabbard to the sword? Is there 
no such Being? From the very construction of a 
complete work, we are used to declare positively, that 
it must be the operation of some artificer, and not 
the effect of mere chance. Doth every such work, 
then, demonstrate an artificer; and do not visible 
objects, and the sense of seeing, and light, demon 
strate one? Do not the difference of the sexes, and 
their inclination to each other, and the use of their 
several powers; do not these things demonstrate an 
artificer? Most certainly they do. 

But further; this constitution of understanding, 
by which we are not simply impressed by sensible 
objects, but take and subtract and add and combine, 
and pass from point to point by inference ; is not all 
this sufficient to prevail on some men, and make 
them ashamed of leaving an artificer out of their 
scheme? If not, let them explain to us what the 
power is that effects each of these; and how it is pos- 
sible that chance should produce things so wonderful, 
and which carry such marks of design.? 

What, then, do these things belong to us alone? 

Many indeed; such as are peculiarly necessary for 


‘ 


20 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


a reasonable creature ; but you will find many, which 
are common to us with mere animals. 

Then, do they too understand what happens ? 

Not at all; for use is one affair, and understand- 
ing another. But God had need of animals, to make 
use of things; and of us to understand that use. It 
is sufficient, therefore, for them to eat, and drink, 
and sleep, and continue their species, and perform 
other such offices as belong to each of them; but to 
us, to whom he hath given likewise a faculty of un- 
derstanding, these offices are not sufficient. For if 
we do not proceed in a wise and systematic manner, 
and suitably to the nature and constitution of each 
thing, we shall never attain our end. For where 
the constitution of beings is different, their offices 
and ends are diffcrent likewise. Thus where the 
constitution is adapted only to use, there use is alone 
sufficient ; but where understanding is added to use, 
unless that too be duly exercised, the end of such a 
being will never be attained. 

Well then; each of the animals is constituted 
either for food, or husbandry, to produce milk, or for 
some other like use; and for these purposes what 
need is there of understanding things, and being able 
to discriminate concerning them? But God hath 
introduced man, as a spectator of himself and of his 
works; and not only as a spectator, but an inter- 
preter of them. It is therefore shameful that man 
should begin and end, where irrational creatures do. 
He is indeed to begin there, but to end where nature 
itself hath fixed our end; and that is, in contempla- 
tion and understanding, and in a scheme of life con- 
formable to nature. 

Take care, then, not to die without the contempla- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 21 


tion of these things. You take a journey to Olympia 

to behold the work of Phidias, and each of you 

thinks it a misfortune to die without a knowledge of 

such things; and will you have no inclination to see 

and understand those works, for which there is no 

need to take a journey; but which are ready and at 

hand, even to those who bestow no pains! Will you 

never perceive what you are, or for what you were 

born, or for what purpose you are admitted to behold — 
this spectacle ? 

But there are in life some things unpleasant and 
difficult. 

And are there none at Olympia? Are not you 
heated? Are not you crowded? Are not you with- 
out good conveniences for bathing? Are not you 
wet through, when it happens to rain? Do you not 
have uproar, and noise, and other disagreeable cir- 
cumstances? But I suppose, by comparing all these 
with the merit of the spectacle, you support and 
endure them. Well; and have you not received fac- 
ulties by which you may support every event? Have 
you not received greatness of soul? Have you not 
received a manly spirit? Have you not received 
patience? What signifies to me anything that hap- 
pens, while my soul is above it? What shall discon- 
cert or trouble or appear grievous to me? Shall 
I not use my powers to that purpose for which 
I received them; but lament and groan at every 
casualty ? 

“True, no doubt; but I have such a disagreeable 
catarrh!” Attend to your diseases, then, as best 
you can. Do you say, it is unreasonable that there 
should be such a discomfort in the world ? 

And how much better is it that you should have a 


22 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


catarrh than complain? Pray, what figure do you 
think Hercules would have made, if there had not 
been a lion, and a hydra, and a stag, and unjust and 
brutal men, whom he expelled and cleared away? 
And what would he have done, if none of these had 
existed? Is it not plain, that he must have wrapt 
himself up and slept? In the first place, then, he 
would never have become a Hercules, by slumbering 
away his whole life in such delicacy and ease; or if 
he had, what good would it havedone? What would 
have been the use of his arm and his strength, — of 
his patience and greatness of mind,—if such cir- 
cumstances and subjects of action had not roused and 
exercised him ? 

What then, must we provide these things for our- 
selves ; and introduce a boar, and a lion, and a hydra, 
into our country ? 

This would be madness and folly. But as they 
were in being, and to be met with, they were proper 
subjects to call out and. exercise Hercules. Do you 
therefore likewise, being sensible of this, consider the 
faculties you have; and after taking a view of them, 
say, “ Bring on me now, O Zeus, what difficulty thou 
wilt, for I have faculties granted me by thee, and 
powers by which I may win honor from every event.” 
—No; but you sit trembling, for fear this or that 
should happen, and lamenting, and mourning, and 
groaning at what doth happen; and then you accuse 
the gods. For what is the consequence of such a 
baseness, but impiety? And yet God hath not only 
granted these faculties, by which we may bear every’ 
event, without being depressed or broken by it; but, 
like a good prince, and a true father, hath placed 
their exercise above restraint, compulsion, or hin- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 23 


drance, and wholly within our own control ; nor hath 
he reserved a power, even to himself, of hindering or 
restraining them. Having these things free, and 
your own, will you not use them, nor consider what 
you have received, nor from whom? But you sit 
groaning and lamenting, some of you, blind to him 
who gave them, and not acknowledging your bene- 
factor; and others basely turn themselves to com- 
plaints and accusations against God! Yet I under- 
take to show you, that you have means and powers 
to exhibit greatness of soul, and a manly spirit; but 
what occasion you have to find fault, and complain, 
do you show me if you can. 


CHAPTER VII. 
OF THE USE OF THE FORMS OF RIGHT REASONING. 


T is not understood by most persons that the prop- 
er use of inferences and hypotheses and interro- 
gations, and logical forms generally, has any relation 
to the duties of life. In every subject of action, the 
question is, how a wise and good man may come hon 
estly and consistently out of it. We must admit, 
therefore, either that the wise man will not engage 
in difficult problems; or that, if he does, he will 
not think it worth his care to deal with them thor- 
oughly; or if we allow neither of these alternatives, 
it is necessary to confess, that some examination 
ought to be made of those points on which the solu- 
tion of these problems chiefly depends. For what is 
reasoning? To lay. down true positions; to reject 
false ones; and to suspend the judgment in doubt- 


24 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


ful ones. Is it enough, then, to have learned mere- 
ly this? It is enough, say you.—Is it enough, 
then, for him who would not commit any mistake in 
the use of money, merely to have heard, that we are 
to receive the good pieces, and to reject the bad ?— 
This is not enough. — What must be added besides? 
That skill which tries and distinguishes what pieces 
are good, what bad.— Therefore, in reasoning too, 
the definition just given is not enough; but it is ne- 
cessary that we should be able to prove and distin- 
guish between the true, and the false, and the doubt- 
fal. This is clear. 

And what further is professed in reasoning ?— To 
admit the consequence of what you have properly 
granted. Well? and is it enough merely to know 
this necessity ?—It is not; but we must learn how 
such a thing is the consequence of such another ; and 
when one thing follows from one premise, and when 
from many premises. Is it not moreover necessary, 
that be, who would behave skilfully in reasoning, 
should both himself demonstrate whatever he asserts, 
and be able to comprehend the demonstrations of 
others; and not be deceived by such as sophisticate, 
as if they were demonstrating? Hence arises the use 
and practice of logical forms; and it appears to be 
indispensable. 

But it may possibly happen, that from the Premieon, 
which we have honestly granted, there arises some 
consequence, which, though false, is nevertheless a 
fair inference. What then ought I todo? To admit 
a falsehood ?—Impossible.—To deny my conces- 
sions ?— But this will not be allowed.— Or assert 
that the consequence does not fairly follow from the 
premises?— Nor is even this practicable. — What 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 25 


then is to be done in the case ?—Is it not this? As 
the having once borrowed money is not enough to 
make a person a debtor, unless he still continues to 
owe money, and has not paid it; so the having 
granted the premises is not enough to make it neces- 
sary to grant the inference, unless we continue our 
concessions. If the premises continue to the end, 
such as they were when the concessions were made, 
it is absolutely necessary to continue the concessions, 
and to admit what follows from them. But if the 
premises do not continue such as they were when the 
concession was made, it is absolutely necessary to re- 
voke the concession, and refuse to accept the infer- 
ence. For this inference is no consequence of ours, 
nor belongs to us, when we have revoked the conces- 
sion of the premises. We ought then thoroughly to 
consider our premises, and their different aspects, on 
which any one, by laying hold, — either on the ques- 
tion itself, or on the answer, or on the inference or 
elsewhere, — may embarrass the unthinking who did 
not foresee the result. So that in this way we may 
not be led into any unbecoming or confused position. 

The same thing is to be observed in hypotheses and 
hypothetical arguments. For it is sometimes neces- 
sary to require some hypothesis to be granted, as a 
kind of step to the rest of the argument. Is every 
given hypothesis then to be granted, or not every one ; 
and if not every one, which? And is he who has 
granted an hypothesis, forever to abide by it? Or is 
he sometimes to revoke it, and admit only conse- 
quences, but not to admit contradictions ?— Ay, but 
a person may say, on your admitting a possible hy- 
pothesis I will drive you upon an impossibility. With 
such a one as this, shall the wise man never engage, 


26 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


but avoid all argument and conversation with him ? 
—And yet who beside the wise man is capable of 
treating an argument, or who beside is sagacious in 
reasoning, and incapable of being deceived and im- 
posed on by sophistry ?— Or will he indeed engage, 
but without regarding whether he behaves rashly and 
heedlessly in the argument ?— Yet how then can he 
be wise as we are supposing him? and without some 
such exercise and preparation, how can he hold his 
own? If this could be shown, then indeed all these 
forms of reasoning would be superfluous and absurd, 
and unconnected with our idea of the virtuous man. 

Why then are we still indolent, and slothful, and 
sluggish, seeking preteuces of avoiding labor? Shall 
we not be watchful to render reason itself accu- 
rate ? —“ But suppose after all, I should make a mis- 
take in these points? it is not as if I had killed a 
father.” — O, slavish man! in this case you had no 
father to kill; but the only fault that you could com- 
mit in this instance, you have committed. This 
very thing I myself said to Rufus, when he reproved 
me for not finding the weak point in some syllogism. 
Why, said I, have I burnt the capitol then? Slave! 
answered he, was the thing here involved the capitol ? 
Or are there no other faults, but burning the capitol, 
or killing a father? and is it no fault to treat rashly, 
and vainly, and heedlessly the things which pass be- 
fore our eyes; not to comprehend a reason, nor a 
demonstration, nor a sophism; nor, in short, to see 
what is strong in reasoning and what is weak? Is 
there nothing wrong in this ? 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 27: 


CHAPTER VIII. 


THAT LOGICAL SUBTLETIES ARE NOT SAFE TO THE UN- 
INSTRUCTED. 


N as many ways as equivalent syllogisms may be 

varied, in so many may the logical forms be va- 
ried likewise. As for instance: “If you had bor- 
rowed, aud not paid, you owe me money. But you 
have not borrowed, and not paid; therefore you do 
not owe me money.” To perform these processes 
skilfally, is the peculiar mark of a philosopher. For 
if an enthymema be an imperfect syllogism ; he who 
is versed in the perfect syllogism, must be equally 
ready to detect an imperfect one. 

“‘ Why then do not we exercise ourselves and.oth- 
ers, after this manner ?” 

Because, even now, though we are not absorbed 
in these things, nor diverted, by me at least, from 
the study of morality; yet we make no eminent ad- 
vances in virtue. What is to be expected then if we 
should add this avocation too? Especially as it 
would not only withdraw us from more necessary 
studies, but likewise afford a capital occasion of con- 
ceit and insolence. For the faculty of arguing, and 
of persuasive reasoning is great; and particularly, if 
it be constantly practised, and receive an additional 
ornament from rhetoric. For, in general, every such 
faculty is dangerous to weak and uninstructed per- 
sons, as being apt to render them arrogant and elat- 
ed. For by what method can one persuade a young 
man, who excels in these kinds of study, that he 
ought not to be an appendage to these accomplish: 


28 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


ments, but they to him? Will he not trample upon 
all such advice; and walk about elated and puffed 
up, not bearing that any one should touch him, to 
put him in mind where he is wanting, and in what 
he goes wrong ? 

What then, was not Plato a philosopher ? 

Well, and was not Hippocrates a physician? Yet 
you see how he expresses himself. But what has his 
style to do with his professional qualities? Why do 
you confound things, accidentally united in the same 
men? If Plato was handsome and well made, must 
I too set myself to becoming handsome and well 
made; as if this was necessary to philosophy, be- 
cause a certain person happened to be at once hand- 
some anda philosopher? Why will you not perceive 
and distinguish what are the things that make men 
philosophers, and what belong to them on other ac- 
counts? Pray, if I were a philosopher, would it be 
necessary that you should be lame too? 

What then? DoTI reject these special faculties? 
By no means ;—neither do I reject the faculty of 
seeing. But if you ask me, what is the good of man; 
I know not where it lies, save in dealing wisely with 
the phenomena of existence. 


CHAPTER Ix. 


HOW FROM THE DOCTRINE OF OUR RELATIONSHIP TO 
GOD, WE ARE TO DEDUCE ITS CONSEQUENCES. 


F what philosophers say of the kinship between God 
and men be true, what has any one to do, but, 
like Socrates, when he is asked what countryman he 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 29 


is, never to say that he is a citizen of Athens, or of 
Corinth, but of the universe? For why, if you limit 
yourself to Athens, do you not farther limit yourself 
to that mere corner of Athens where your body was 
brought forth? Is it not, evidently, from some larger 
local tie, which comprehends not only that corner, 
and your whole house, but the whole country of your 
fathers, that you call yourself an Athenian, or a Co- 
rinthian ? He then, who understands the adminis- 
tration of the universe, and has learned that the 
principal and greatest and most comprehensive of all 
things is this vast system, extending from men to God ; 
and that from Him the seeds of being are descend- 
ed, not only to one’s father or grandfather, but to all 
things that are produced and born on earth; and es- 
pecially to rational natures, as they alone are quali- 
fied to partake of a communication with the Deity, 
being connected with him by reason ; why may not 
such a one call himself a citizen of the universe? 
Why not a son of God? And why shall he fear any- 
thing that happens among men? Shall kinship to 
Cesar, or any other of the great at Rome, enable a 
man to live secure, above contempt; and void of all 
fear whatever ; and shall not the having God for our 
maker, and father, and guardian, free us from griefs 
and alarms ? 

- “But wherewithal shall I be fed? For I have 
nothing.” 

To what do fugitive slaves trust, when they run 
away from their masters? Is it to their estates? 
Their servants? Their plate? To nothing but them- 
selves. Yet they do not fail to obtain the necessaries 
of life. And must a philosopher, think you, leave his 
own abode, to rest and rely upon others ; and not take 


80 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


care of himself? Must he be more helpless and anx- 
ious than the brute beasts; each of which is self-suf- 
ficient, and wants neither proper food, nor any suita- 
ble and natural provision? One would think that 
you would need an instructor, not to guard you from 
thinking too meanly or ignobly of yourselves; but 
that his business would be to take care lest there be 
young men of such a spirit, that, knowing their affin- 
ity to the gods, and that we are as it were fettered 
‘by the body and its possessions, and by so many other 
things as are thus made needful for the daily pur- 
suits of life, they should resolve to throw them all off, 
as both troublesome and useless, and depart to their 
divine kindred. 

This is the work, if any, that ought to employ your 
master and preceptor, if you had one, that you should 
come to him, and say: “ Epictetus, we can no longer 
bear being tied down to this poor body; feeding, and 
resting, and cleaning it, and vexed with so many low 
cares on its account. Are not these things indiffer- 
ent, and nothing to us; and death no evil? Are we 
not of kindred to God; and did we not come from 
him? Suffer us to go back thither from whence we 
came: suffer us at length to be delivered from these 
fetters that bind and weigh us down. Here thieves 
and robbers, courts and tyrants, claim power over us, 
through the body and its possessions. Suffer us to 
show them that they have no power.” 

And in this’ case it would be my part to answer: 
“My friends, wait for God till he shall give the sig- 
nal, and dismiss you from this service; then return 
to him. For the present, be content to remain at this 
post, where he has placed you. The time of your 
abode here is short and easy, to such as are disposed 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 31 


like you; for what tyrant, what robber, what thief or 
what court can be formidable to those who thus count 
for nothing the body and its possessions. Stay, nor 
foolishly depart.” 

Thus ought the case to stand between a preceptor 
and ingenuous young men. But how stands it now? 
The preceptor has no life in him; and you have 
none. When you have had enongh to-day, you sit 
weeping about to-morrow, how you shall get food. 
Why, if you have it, slave, you will have it; if not, 
you will go out of life. The door is open; why do 
you lament; what room remains for tears; what oc- 
casion for flattery? Why should any one person envy 
another? Why should he be impressed with awe 
by those who have great possessions, or are placed 
in high rank? especially, if they are powerful and 
passionate? For what will they do to us? The 
things. which they can do, we do not regard: the 
things about which we are concerned, they cannot 
reach. Who then, after all, shall hold sway over a 
person thus disposed ? How behaved Socrates in re- 
gard to these things? As it became one conscious 
of kinship with the gods. He said to his judges : — 

“Tf you should tell me, ‘ We will acquit you, upon 
condition that you shall no longer discourse in the 
manner you have hitherto done, nor make any dis- 
turbance either among our young or our old people’; 
I would answer: ‘You are ridiculous in thinking, 
that if your general had placed me in any post, I 
ought to maintain and defend it, and choose to die 
a thousand times, rather than desert it; but that if 
God hath assigned me any station or metliod of life, 
I ought to desert that for you.’” 

This it is, for a man to truly recognize his relation- 


82 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


ship with God. But we habitually think of ourselves 
as mere stomach and intestines and bodily parts. Be- 
cause we fear, because we desire, we flatter those who 
can help us‘in these matters; we dread them too. 

A person desired me once to write for him to Rome. 
He was one vulgarly esteemed unfortunate, as he had 
been formerly illustrious and rich, and was after- 
wards stripped of all his possessions, and reduced to 
live here. I wrote for him in a submissive style ; 
but, after reading my letter, he returned it to me, 
and said: “I wanted your assistance, not your pity ; 
for no evil hath befallen me.” 

Thus Rufus, to try me, used to say, this or that you 
will have from your master. When I answered him, 
these are mere human affairs; Why then, says he, 
should I intercede with him,* when you can receive 
from yourself things more important? For what 
one hath of his own, it is superfluous and vain to re- 
ceive from another. Shall I then, who can receive 
nobleness and a manly spirit from myself, receive an 
estate, or a sum of money, or a place, from you? 
Heaven forbid! I will not be so insensible of my own 
possessions. But, if a person is fearful and abject, 
what else is necessary, but to apply for permission to 
bury him as if he were dead. “ Please forward to us 
the corpse of such a one.”’ For, in fact, such a one is 
that, and nothing more. For, if he were anything 
more, he would be sensible that man is not to be 
made miserable at the will of his fellow-man. 


* This is a disputed passage, and something is probably lost. The 
above version mainly follows Upton and Mrs. Carter. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 33 


CHAPTER X. 


CONCERNING THOSE WHO SEEK PREFERMENT AT ROME. 


1 we all applied ourselves as heartily to our proper 
business, as the old politicians at Rome to their 
schemes, perhaps we too might make some profi- 
ciency. J know a man older than I am, who is now 
a commissary at Rome. When he passed through 
this place, on his return from exile, what an account 
did he give me of his former life! and how did he 
promise, that for the future, when he had returned, 
he would apply himself to nothing but how to spend 
the remainder of his days in repose and tranquillity. 
“For how few have J now remaining!” he said. — 
You will not do it, said I. When you are once with- 
in reach of Rome, you will forget all this; and, if you 
can but once gain admittance to court, you will be 
rejoiced and thank God. “If you ever find me, Epic- 
tetus,”’ said he, ‘‘ putting one foot into the court, 
think of me whatever you please.” Now, after all, 
how did he act? Before he entered the city, he was 
met by a billet from Cesar. On receiving it, he for- 
got all his former resolutions; and has ever since 
been accumulating business upon himself. I should 
be glad now to have an opportunity of putting him in 
mind of his discourse upon the road; and of point- 
ing out by how much I was the truer prophet. 

What then do I say? that man is made for an in- 
active life? No, surely. But why is not ours a life 
of action? For my own part, I wake at dawn to Tec- 
ollect what things I am to read over again [with my 
pupils], and then say to myself quickly, What is it to 

3 


84 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


me how such a one reads? My present business 1s to 
sleep. 

Yet what likeness is there between their kind of 
activity and ours? If you consider what it is they 
do, you will see. For about what are they employed 
the whole day, but in calculating, contriving, con- 
sulting, about provisions, about an estate, or other in- 
terests like these? Is there any likeness, then, be- 
tween reading such a petition from any one, as, “T 
entreat you to give me a permission to export corn’; 
and, “I entreat you to learn from Chrysippus, what 
the administration of the universe is; and what place. 
a reasonable creature holds in it. Learn, too, what 
you yourself are; and wherein your good and evil 
consist,” Are these things at all alike? Do they 
require an equal degree of application? And is it as 
shameful to neglect the one as the other ? 

Well, then, are we older men the only idle dream- 
ers? No: but you young men are so in a greater 
degree. And as we old folks, when we see young 
ones trifling, are tempted to trifle with them; s0, 
much more, if I were to see you earnest and ardent, 
I should be excited to labor with you. 


CHAPTER XI 
OF NATURAL AFFECTION. 


HEN an important personage once came to visit 

him, Epictetus, having inquired into the par- 
ticulars of his affairs, asked him, Whether he had a 
wife and children? The other replying that he had, 
Epictetus likewise inquired, In what manner do you 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 85 


five with them? “ Very miserably,” says he. —How 
so? For men do not marry, and get children, to be 
miserable; but rather to make themselves happy. — 
“ But I am so very miserable about my children, that 
the other day, when my daughter was sick, and ap 
peared to be in danger, I could not bear even to be 
with her ; but ran away, till it was told me, that she 
was recovered.””— And pray do you think this was 
acting right ?— “It was acting naturally,” said he. 
— Well? do but convince me that if was acting nat- 
urally, and I can as well convince you that everything 
natural is right.—‘“‘ All, or most of us fathers, are 
affected in the same way.” —I do not deny the facet; 
but the question between us is, whether it be right. 
For by this way of reasoning, it must be said, that 
diseases happen for the good of the body, because 
they do happen; and even that vices are natural, be- 
eause all, or most of us, are guilty of them. Do you 
show me then, how such a behavior as yours appears 
to be natural. 

“JT cannot undertake that. But do you rather 
show me, that it is neither natural nor right.” 

If we were disputing about black and white, what 
criterion must we call in, to distinguish them ? 

“ The sight.” 

If about hot and cold, or hard and soft, what ? 

“ The touch.” 

Well then? when we are debating about natural 
and unnatural, and right and wrong; what criterion 
are we to take? 

“T cannot tell 

And yet to be ignorant of a criterion of colors, or 
ef smells, or tastes, might perhaps be no very great 
loss. But do you think, that he suffers only a small 


36 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


loss, who is ignorant of what is good and evil, and 
natural and unnatural to man ? 

“No. The very greatest.” 

Well; tell me; are all things which are judged 
good and proper by some, rightly judged to be so? 
Thus, is it possible, that the several opinions of Jews, 
and Syrians, and Egyptians, and Romans, concerning 
food, should all be right ? 

‘“‘ How can it be possible ? ” 

I suppose then, it is absolutely necessary that, if the 
opinions of the Egyptians be right, the others must 
be wrong; if those of the Jews be good, all the rest 
must be bad. 

“ How can it be otherwise ?”’ 

And where ignorance is, there likewise is want of 
wisdom and instruction in the most Ey points. 

“Tt is granted.” 

Then as you are sensible of this, you will for the 
future apply to nothing, and think of nothing else, 
but how to learn the criterion of what is agreeable to 
nature ; and to use that, in judging of each particular 
case. 

At present the assistance I have to give you, to- 
wards what you desire, is this. Does affection seem 
to you to be a right and a natural thing? 

‘‘ How should it be otherwise ? ” 

Well; and is affection natural and right, and 
reason not so? 

‘“‘ By no means.” 

Is there any opposition, then, between reason and 
affection ? 

J think not.” 

Suppose there were: if one of two opposites be nat- 
ural, the other must necessarily be unnatural. Must 
it not? 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 37 


“Tt must.” 

What we find, then, to accord at once with love and 
reason, that we may safely pronounce to be right and 
good. 

“ Agreed.” 

Well, then: you will not dispute this, that to run 
away, and leave a sick child, is contrary to reason. 
It remains for us to consider, whether it be consistent 
with affection. 

“ Let us consider it.” 

Did you, then, from an affection to your child, do 
right in running away, and leaving her? Has her 
mother no affection for the child? 

“ Yes, surely, she has.” 

Would it have been right, then, that her mother 
too should leave her; or would it not? 

“Tt would not.” 

And does not her nurse love her? 

‘¢ She does.” 

Then ought she likewise to leave her ? 

‘“ By no means.” 

And does not her preceptor love her ? 

‘“ He does.” 

Then ought he also to have run away, and left 
her; the child being thus left alone and unassisted, 
from the great affection of her parents, and her 
friends; or left to die among people, who neither 
loved her, nor took care of her? 

*¢ Heaven forbid!” 

But is it not unreasonable and unjust, that what 
you think right in yourself, on account of your affec- 
tion, should not be allowed to others, who have the 
very same affection with you ? 

“Tt is absurd.” 


38 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Pray, if you were sick yourself, should you be will- 
ing to have your family, and even your wife and 
children, so very affectionate, as to leave you help- 
less and alone? 

“ By no means.” 

Or would you wish to be so loved by your friends, 
as from their excessive affection always to be left 
alone when you were sick? Or would you not re- 
joice; if it were possible, to have such a kind of af- 
fection from your enemies, as to make them thus let 
you alone? If so, it remains, that your behaviour 
was by no means affectionate. But now, was there 
no other motive that induced you to desert your 
child ? 

“ How is that possible ?” 

I mean some such motive as induced a person at 
Rome to hide his face while a horse was running, to 
which he earnestly wished success; and when, beyond 
his expectation, it won the race, he was obliged him- 
self to be sponged, to recover from his faintness. 

‘“¢ And what was this motive ?” 

At present, perhaps, it cannot be made clear to you. 
It is sufficient to be convinced, if what philosophers 
say be true, that we are not to seek any motive mere- 
ly from without; but that there is the same [unseen] 
motive in all cases, which moves us to do or forbear 
any action ; to speak or not to speak ; to be elated or 
depressed; to avoid or pursue: that very impulse 
which hath now moved us two; you, to come, and 
sit and hear me ; and me, to speak as I do. 

“ And what is that?” 

Is it anything else, than that it seemed right to us 
to do so? 

“ Nothing else.” 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 39 


And if it had seemed otherwise to us, what else 
should we have done, than what we thought right? 
This, and not the death of Patroclus, was the real 
source of the lamentation of Achilles, — for every 
man is not thus affected by the death ofa friend, — 
that it seemed right to him. This too was the cause 
of your running away from your child, that it then 
seemed right; and if hereafter you should stay with 
her, it will be becanse that scems right. You are 
now returning to Rome, because it seems right to 
you; but if you should alter your opinion, you will 
not return. In a word, neither death, nor exile, nor 
pain, nor anything of this kind, is the real cause of 
our doing or not doing any action: but our inward 
opinions and principles. DoI convince you of this, 
or not? 

“ You do.” 

Well then: such as the cause is, such will be the 
effect. From this day forward, then, whenever we do 
anything wrong, we will impute it to the wrong prin- 
ciple from which we act; and we will endeavor to re- 
move and extirpate that, with greater care than we 
would remove wens and tumors from the body. In 
like manner, we will ascribe what we do right, to the 
same cause; and we will accuse neither servant, uor 
neighbor, nor wife, nor children, as the cause of any 
evil to us; persuaded that if we had not accepted such 
principles, we should not carry them to such conse- 
quences. The control of these principles lies in us, 
and not in any outward things. Of these principles 
we ourselves, and not externals, are the masters. 

“ Agreed.” 

From this day, then, we will not so closely inquire 
as to any external conditions, — estate, or slaves, or 


40 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


horses, or dogs,—but only make sure of our own 
principles. 

“ Such is my desire,”’ said the visitor. 

You see, then, that it is necessary for you to be- 
come a student, that being whom every one laughs 
at, if you really desire to make an examination of 
your own principles. But this, as you should know, 
is not the work of an hour or a day. 


CHAPTER XII. 


OF CONTENTMENT. 


ONCERNING the gods, some affirm, that there is 
no deity; others, that he indeed exists, but is 
slothful, negligent, and without providential care; a 
third class admits both his being and his providence, 
but only in respect to great and heavenly objects, not 
earthly ; a fourth recognizes him both in heaven and 
earth, but only in general, not individual matters; 
a fifth, like Ulysses and Socrates, says, “‘I cannot be 
hid from thee in any of my motions.” * 

It is, before all things, necessary to examine each 
of these opinions; which is, and which is not rightly 
spoken. Now, if there are no gods, wherefore serve 
them? Ifthere are, but they take no care of any- 
thing, how is the case bettered? Or, if they both are, 
and take care; yet, if there is nothing communicated 
from them to men, and therefore certainly nothing to 
me, how much better is it? A wise and good man, 
after examining these things, submits his mind to 
Him who administers the whole, as good citizens do 
to the laws of the commonwealth. 


%* Xenophon, Mem. 1.1 ; Homer, Iliad, X. 278. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 41 


He, then, who comes to be instructed, onght to 
come with this aim: “ How may I in everything fol- 
low the gods? How may I acquiesce in the divine 
administration? And how may I be free?” For he 
is free, to whom all happens agreeably to his desire, 
and whom no one can unduly restrain. 

“ What then, is freedom mere license ? ” 

By no means; for madness and freedom are in- 
compatible. 

“But I would have that happen which appears to 
me desirable ; however it comes to appear so.” 

You are mad: you have lost your senses. Do not 
you know, that freedom is a very beautiful and valu- 
able thing? But for me to choose at random, and 
for things to happen agreeably to such a choice, may 
be so far from a beautiful thing, as to be, of all oth- 
ers, the most undesirable. For how do we proceed 
in writing? Do I choose to write the name of Dion 
(for instance) as I will? No; but I am taught to be 
willing to write it as it ought to be written. And 
what is the case in music? The same. And what 
in every other art or science? Otherwise, it would 
be of no purpose to learn anything, if it were to be 
adapted to each one’s particular humor. Is it then 
only in the greatest and principal matter, that of 
freedom, permitted me to desire at random? By no 
means; but’true instruction is this,—learning to 
desire that things should happen as they do. And 
how do they happen? As the appointer of them hath 
appointed. He hath appointed, that there should be 
summer and winter, plenty and dearth, virtue and 
vice, and all such contrarieties, for the harmony of 
the whole. To each of us he has given a body and 
its parts, and our several possessions and companions. 


42 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Mindful of this appointment, we should enter upon a 
course of education and instruction, not in order to 
change the constitution of things ;— a gift neither 
practicable nor desirable ;—- but that things being as 
they are with regard to us, we may have our mind 
accommodated to the facts. Can we, for instance, 
flee from mankind? Howis that possible? Can we, 
by conversing with them, transform them? Who 
has given us such a power? What then remains, or 
what method is there to be found, for such a com- 
merce with them, that, while they act according to 
the appearances in their own minds, we may never- 
theless be affected conformably to nature ? 

But you are wretched and discontented. If you 
are alone, you term it a desert; and if with men, 
you call them cheats and robbers. You find fault 
too with your parents, and children, and brothers, 
and neighbors. Whereas you ought, if you live alone, 
to call that repose and freedom, and to esteem your- 
self as resembling the gods; and when you are in 
company, not to call it a crowd, and a tumult, and a 
trouble, but an assembly, and a festival ; and thus to 
take all things contentedly. What then, is the pun- 
ishment of those who do not so accept them? To be 
—as they are. Is any one discontented with being 
alone? Let him remain in his desert. Discontented 
with his parents? Let him be a bad son; and let 
him mourn. Discontented with his children? Let 
him be a bad father. Shall we throw him into pris- 
on? What prison? Where he already is, for he is 
in a situation against his will, and wherever any one 
is against his will, that is to him a prison; just as 
Socrates was not truly in prison, for he was willingly 


there. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 43 


“ What, then, must my leg be lame ?” 

And is it for oue paltry leg, wretch, that you ac- 
cuse the universe? Can you not forego that, in con- 
sideration of the whole? Can you not give up some- 
thing? Can you not gladly yield it to him who gave 
it? And will you be angry and discontented with 
the decrees of Zeus; which he, with the Fates, who 
spun in his presence the thread of your birth, or- 
dained and appointed? Do not you know how very 
small a part you are of the whole? That is, as to 
body; for, as to reason, you are neither worse, nor 
less, than divine. For reason is not measured by size 
or height, but by principles. Will you not therefore 
place your good there, where you share with the 
gods ? 

“But how wretched am I, in sueh a father and 
mother!” 

What, then, was it granted you to come before- 
hand, and make your own terms, and say, “ Let 
such and such persons, at this hour, be the authors 
of my birth”? It was not granted; for it was ne- 
cessary that your parents should exist before you, and 
so you be born afterwards. —Of whom ? — Of just 
such as they were. What, then, since they are such, 
is there no remedy afforded you? Surely, you would 
be wretched and miserable, if you knew not the use 
of sight, and shut your eyes in presence of colors ; 
and are not you more wretched aud miserable, in be- 
ing ignorant, that you have within you the needful 
nobleness and manhood wherewith to meet these ac- 
cidents? Events proportioned to your reason are 
brought before you; but you turn it away, at the 
very time when you ought to have it the most open 
and discerning. Why do not you rather thank the 


44 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


gods, that they have made you superior to those 
events which they have not placed within your own 
control ; and have rendered you accountable for that 
only, which is within your own control? Of your 
parents they acquit you, as not accountable: of your 
brothers they acquit you ; of body, possessions, death, 
life, they acquit you. For what, then, have they 
made you accountable? For that which is alone 
in your own power; a right use of things as they 
appear. Why, then, should you draw those cares 
upon -yourself, for which you are not accountable ? 
This is giving one’s self vexation, without need. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


HOW EVERYTHING MAY BE PERFORMED TO THE DIVINE 
ACCEPTANCE. 


HEN a person inquired, how any one might eat 

to the divine acceptance; if he eats with jus- 
tice, said Epictetus, and with gratitude, and fairly, and 
temperately, and decently, must he not also eat to 
the divine acceptance? And if you call for hot water, 
and your servant does not hear you; or, if he does, 
brings it only warm; or perhaps is not to be found 
at home ; then to abstain from anger or petulance, is 
not this to the divine acceptance ? 

“ But how, then, can one bear such things ?”’ 

O slavish man! will you not bear with your own 
brother, who has God for his Father, as being a son 
from the same stock, and of the same high descent? 
But, if you chance to be placed in some superior sta- 
tion, will you presently set yourself up for a tyrant? 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 45 


Will you not remember what you are, and over whom 
you bear rule? That they are by nature your rela- 
tions, your brothers; that they are the offspring of 
God? 

* But I have them by right of purchase, and not 
they me.” 

Do you see what itis you regard? Your regards 
look downward towards the earth, and what is lower 
than earth, and towards the unjust laws of men long 
dead ; but up towards the divine laws you never turn 
your eyes. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
THAT ALL THINGS ARE UNDER THE DIVINE SUPERVISION. 


HEN a person asked him, how any one might 

be convinced that his every act is under the 

supervision of God? Do not you think, said Hpic- 

tetus, that all things are mutually connected and 
united ? 

“T do.” 

Well; and do not you think, that things on earth 
feel the influence of the heavenly powers ? 

* AE Nege? 

Else how is it that in their season, as if by express 
command, God bids the plants to blossom and they 
blossom, to bud and they bud, to bear fruit and they 
bear it, to ripen it and they ripen ; and when again 
he bids them drop their leaves, and withdrawing into 
themselves to rest and wait, they rest and wait? 
Whence again are there Seen, on the increase and de- 
crease of the moon, and the approach and departure 
of the sun, so great changes and transformations in 


46 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


earthly things? Have then the very leaves, and our 
own bodies, this connection and sympathy with the 
whole; and have not our souls much more? But 
our souls are thus connected and intimately joined to 
God, as being indeed members and distinct portions 
of his essence ; and must not he be sensible of every 
movement of them; as belonging and connatural to 
himself? Can even you think of the divine adminis- 
tration, and every other divine subject, and together 
with these of human affairs also; can you at once 
receive impressions on your senses and your under- 
standing, from a thousand objects; at once assent to 
some things, deny or suspend your judgment concern- 
ing others, and preserve in your mind impressions 
from so many and various objects, by whose aid you 
can revert to ideas similar to those which first .im- 
pressed you? Can you retain a variety of arts and 
the memorials of ten thousand things? And is not 
God capable of surveying all things, and being pres- 
ent with all, and in communication with all? Is the 
sun capable of illuminating so great a portion of the 
universe, and of leaving only that small part of it un- 
illuminated, which is covered by the shadow of the 
earth, —and cannot He who made and moves the 
sun, a small part of himself, if compared with the 
whole, — cannot he perceive all things ? 

“But I cannot,” say you, “ attend to all things at 
once.” Who asserts that you have equal power with 
Zeus? Nevertheless he has assigned to each man a 
director, his own good genius, and committed him to 
that guardianship; a director sleepless and not to be 
deceived. To what better and more careful guardian 
could he have committed each one of us? So that 
when you have shut your doors, and darkened your 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. ' AT 


room, remember, never to say that you are alone; 
for you are not alone; but God is within, and your 
genius is within; and what need have they of light, 
to see what you are doing? To this God you like- 
wise ought to swear such an oath as the soldiers do ta 
Cesar. For they, in order to receive their pay, swear 
to prefer before all things the safety of Caesar; and 
.will not you swear, who have received so many and 
so great favors; or, if you have sworn, will you not 
fulfil the oath? And what must you swear? Never 
to distrust, nor accuse, nor murmur at any of the 
things appointed by him; nor to shrink from doing” 
or enduring that which is inevitable. Is this oath 
like the former? In the first oath persons swear 
never to dishonor Cesar; by the last, never to dis- 
honor themselves. 


CHAPTER XV. 
WHAT PHILOSOPHY PROMISES. 


HEN one consulted him, how he might per- 
suade his brother to forbear treating him ill; 
— Philosophy, answered Epictetus, doth not promise 
to procure any outward good for man; otherwise it 
would admit something beyond its proper theme. 
For as the material of a carpenter is wood; of a 
statuary, brass; so of the art of living, the material 
is each man’s own life. 
“‘ What, then, is my brother’s life?” 
That, again, is matter for his own art, but is ex- 
ternal to you; like property, health, or reputation, 
Philosophy promises none of these. In every circum, 


48 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


stance I will keep my will in harmony with nature. 
To whom belongs that will? To Him in whom I 
exist. 

“ But how, then, is my brother’s unkindness to be 
cured ?”’ 

Bring him to me, and I will tell him; but I have 
nothing to say to you about his unkindness. 

But the inquirer still further asking for a rule for. 
self-government, if he should not be reconciled ; Hpic- 
tetus answered thus : — 

No great thing is created suddenly ; any more than 
a bunch of grapes or a fig. If you tell me, that you 
desire a fig, [answer you, that there must be time. 
Let it first blossom, then bear fruit, then ripen. Since 
then, the fruit of a fig-tree is not brought to perfec- 
tion suddenly, or in one hour; do you think to pos- 
sess instantaneously and easily the fruit of the human 
mind? I warn you, expect it not. 


CHAPTER XVI. 
OF PROVIDENCE. 


E not surprised, if other animals have all things 
necessary to the body, ready provided for them, 

not only meat and drink, but lodging; if they want 
neither shoes, nor bedding, nor clothes; while we 
stand in need of all these. For they not being made 
for themselves, but for service, it was not fit that they 
should be so formed as to be waited on by others. 
For consider what it would be for us to take care, 
not only for ourselves, but for sheep and asses too; 
how they should be clothed, how shod, and how they 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 49 


should eat and drink. But as soldiers are furnished 
ready for their commander, shod, clothed, and armed, 
—for it would be a grievous thing for a colonel to be 
obliged to go through his regiment to put on their 
clothes, —so nature has furnished these useful ani- 
mals, ready provided, and standing in need of no fur- 
ther care. So that one little boy, with only a crook, 
drives a flock. 

But we, instead of being thankful for this, com- 
plain of God, that there is not the same kind of care 
taken of us likewise. And yet, good Heaven! any 
one thing in the creation is sufficient to demonstrate 
a Providence, to a humble and grateful mid. Not 
to instance great things, the mere possibility of pro- 
ducing milk from grass, cheese from milk, and wool 
from skins; who formed and planned it? No one, 
say you. O surprising irreverence and dulness! But 
come ; let us omit the primary works of nature. Let 
us contemplate her merely incidental traits. What 
is more useless than the hairs upon one’s chin? And 
yet has she not made use even of these, in the most 
becoming manner possible? Has she not by these dis- 
tinguished the sexes? Does not nature in each of us 
call out, even at a distance, I am a man; approach 
and address me as such ; inquire no further; see the 
characteristic. On the other hand, with regard to 
women, as she has mixed something softer in their 
voice, so she has deprived them of a beard. But no; 
[some think] this living being should have been left 
undistinguished, and each of us should be obliged to 
proclaim, “I amaman!” But why is not this char- 
acteristic beautiful and becoming, and venerable ? 
How much more beautiful than the comb of cocks; 
how much more noble than the mane of lions! 

4 


50 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Therefore, we ought to preserve the characteristics, 
made by the Creator; we ought not to reject them, 
nor confound, as much as in us lies, the distinct 
sexes. 

Are these the only works of Providence, with re- 
gard to us? And what speech can fitly celebrate their. 
praise? For, if we had any understanding, ought we 
not, both in public and in private, incessantly to 
sing and praise the Deity, and rehearse his benefits ? 
Ought we not, whether we dig, or plough, or eat, to 
sing this hymn to God? Great is God, who has sup- 
plied us with these instruments to till the ground; 
great is God, who has given us hands and organs of 
digestion; who has given us to grow insensibly, to 
breathe in sleep. These things we ought forever to 
celebrate; but to make it the theme of the greatest 
and divinest hymn, that he has given us the power to 
appreciate these gifts, and to use them well. But be- 
cause the most of you are blind and insensible, there 
must be some one to fill this station, and lead in be- 
half of all men, the hymn to God; for what else can I 
do, a lame old man, but sing hymns to God? Were 
I a nightingale, I would act the part of a nightin- 
gale; were I a swan, the part of a swan. But since 
I am a reasonable creature, it is my duty to praise 
God. This is my business. Idoit. Nor will I ever 
desert this post, so long as it is permitted me; and I 
call on you to join in the same song. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 5} 


CHAPTER XVIL 


THAT THE ART OF REASONING IS NECESSARY. 


INCE it is Reason which shapes and regulates all 
other things, it ought not itself to be left in dis- 
order. But by what shall it be regulated? Evi- 
dently, either by itself, or by something else. Well; 
either that too is Reason, or something else superior 
to Reason, which is impossible; and, if it be Reason, 
what again shall regulate that? For, if this Reason, 
can regulate itself, so can the former; and, if we still 
require any further agent, the series will be infinite, 
and without end.. 

“ But,” say you, “ the essential thing is to prescribe 
for qualities of character.” 

Would you hear about these, therefore? Well; 
hear. But then, if you say to me, that you cannot 
tell whether my arguments are true or false; and if 
I happen to express myself ambiguously, and you bid 
me make it clearer ; I will then at once show you that 
this is the first essential. Therefore, I suppose, they 
first establish the art of reasoning; just as, before the 
measuring of corn, we settle the measure. For, un- 
less we first determine the measure and the weight, 
how shall we be able to measure or weigh? Thus, 
in the present case ; unless we have first learned, and 
fixed, that which is the criterion of other things, and 
by which other things are learned, how shall we be 
able accurately to learn anything else? How is it 
possible? Well; a bushel-measure is only wood, a 
thing of no value, but it measures corn. And logic 
is of no value in itself ;— that we will consider here- 


52 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


after, but grant it now;—it is enough that it dis- 
tinguishes and examines, and, as one may say, meas- 
ures and weighs all other things. Who says this? 
Is it only Chrysippus, and Zeno, and Cleanthes ? 
Does not Antisthenes say it? And who is it then, 
who has written, that the beginning of a right edu- 
cation is the examination of words? Does not Socra- 
tes say it? Of whom, then, does Xenophon write, 
that he began by the examination of words, what each 
signified ? 

Is this, then, the great and admirable thing, to un- 
derstand or interpret Chrysippus ? : 

Who says that itis? But what, then, is the ad- 
mirable thing ? 

To understand the will of nature. 

Well then; do you conform to it yourself? In 
that case, what need have you for any one else? 
For, if it be true, that men err but unwillingly, and 
if you have learnt the truth, you must needs act 
rightly. 

But, indeed, I do not conform to the will of nature. 

Who, then, shall interpret that? 

They say, Chrysippus. I go and inquire what this 
interpreter of nature says. Soon I cannot under- 
stand his meaning. I seek one to interpret that. I 
call on him to explain everything as clearly as if it 
were in Latin. Yet what right has this last inter- 
preter to boast? Nor has Chrysippus himself, so 
long as he only interprets the will of nature, and 
does not follow it; aud much less has his interpreter. 
For we have no need of Chrysippus, on his own ac- 
count; but that, by his means, we may apprehend 
the will of nature ; just as no one values a diviner on 
his own account, but that, by his assistance, men 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 58 


hope to understand future events and heavenly indi- 
cations ; nor the auguries, on their own account, but 
on account of what is signified by them; neither is it 
the raven, or the crow, that is admired, but the di- 
vine purposes displayed through their means. Thus 
I come to the diviner and interpreter of these higher 
things; and say, “Inspect the auguries for me: 
what is signified to me?” Having taken, and in- 
spected them, he thus interprets them. You have a 
free. will, O man! incapable of being restrained or 
compelled. This is written here in the auguries. I 
will show you this, first, in the faculty of assent. Can 
anyone restrain you from assenting to truth? No 
oue. Can any one compel you to admit a falsehood ? 
No one. You see, then, that you have here a free 
will, incapable of being restrained, or compelled, or 
hindered. Well; is it otherwise with regard to pur- 
suit and desire? What can displace one pursuit? 
Another pursuit. What, desite and aversion? An- 
other desire and another aversion. “If you offer 
death as an alternative,” say you, you compel me. 
No; not the alternative does it, but your conviction 
that itis better to do such a thing than to die. Here, 
again, you see that it is your own conviction which 
compels you; that is, choice compels choice. For, if 
God had constituted that portion which he has sep- 
arated from his own essence, and given to us, capable 
of being restrained or compelled, either by himself, or 
by any other, he would not have been God, nor have 
fitly cared for us. 

These things, says the diviner, I find in the augu- 
ries. These things are announced to you. If you 
please, you are free. If you please, you will have no 
one to complain of, no one to accuse. All will be 


54 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


equally according to your own mind, and to the mind 
of God. 

For the sake of this oracle, I go to this diviner and 
philosopher ; admiring not alone him for his interpre- 
tation, but also the things which he interprets. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
THAT WE OUGHT NOT TO BE ANGRY WITH THE ERRING. 


| F what the philosophers say be true, that all men’s 

actions proceed from one source; that, as they 
assent, from a persuasion that a thing is so, and 
dissent, from a persuasion that it is not, and sus- 
pend their judgment, from a persuasion that it is un- 
certain ; so, likewise, they seek a thing, from a per- 
suasion that it is for their advantage ; — and it is im- 
possible to esteem one thing advantageous, and yet 
desire another ; to esteem one thing a duty, and yet 
pursue another ;— why, after all, should we be an- 
gry at the multitude? 

‘“‘ They are thieves and robbers.” 

What do you mean by thieves and robbers? They 
are in an error concerning good and evil. Ought 
you, then, to be angry, or rather to pity them? Do 
but show them their error, and you will see, that 
they will amend their faults; but, if they do not see 
the error, they will rise no higher than their convic- 
tions. 

“What, then, ought not this thief and this adul- 
terer to be destroyed ?” 

Nay, call him rather one who errs and is deceived 
in thiugs of the greatest importance ; blinded, not in 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 55 


the vision, that distinguishes white from black, but in 
the reason, that discerns good from evil? By stating 
your question thus, you would see how inhuman it 
is; and just as if you should say, “ Ought not this 
blind, or that deaf man, to be destroyed?” For, if 
the greatest hurt be a deprivation of the most valua- 
ble things, and the most valuable thing to every one 
be rectitude of will; when any one is deprived of this, 
why, after all, are you angry? You ought not to be 
affected, O man! contrary to nature, by the evil 
deeds of another. Pity him rather. Yield not to 
hatred and anger; nor say, as many do, “‘ What! 
shall these execrable and odious wretches dare to act 
thus?” Whence have you so suddenly learnt wis- 
dom ? 

Why are we thus enraged? Because we make 
idols of those things which such people take from us. 
Make not an idol of your clothes, and you will not be 
enraged with the thief. Make not an idol of a wo- 
man’s beauty, and you will not be enraged with an 
adulterer. Know, that thief and adulterer cannot 
reach the things that are properly your own; but 
those only which belong to others, and are not within 
your power. If you can give up these things, and 
look upon them as not essential, with whom will you 
any longer be enraged? But while you idolize them, 
be angry with yourself, rather than with others. 
Consider the case: you have a fine suit of clothes; 
your neighbor has not. You have a casement; you 
want to air them. He knows not in what the good 
of man consists, but imagines it is in a fine suit of 
clothes; just as you imagine. Shall he not come 
and take them away? When you show a cake to 
greedy people, and are devouring it all yourself; 


56 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


would not you have them snatch it from you? Do 
not tempt them. Do not have a casement. Do not 
expose your clothes. I, too, the other day, had an 
iron lamp burning before my household deities. 
Hearing a noise at the window,I ran. I found my 
lamp was stolen. I considered, that he who took it 
away did nothing unaccountable.. What then? I 
said, to-morrow you shall find an earthen one; for 
a man loses only what he has.—‘“TI have lost my 
coat.”” Ay; because you had a coat. “I have a 
pain in my head.” You certainly can have none in 
your horns. Why then are you out of humor? For 
loss and pain can be only of such things as are pos- 
sessed. 

But the tyrant will chain— what? A leg. He 
will take away— what? A head. What is there, 
then, that he can neither chain nor take away? 
The free will. Hence the advice of the ancients, — 
Know thyself. 

“‘ What then ought we to do?” 

Practise yourself, for heaven’s sake, in little things ; 
and thence proceed to greater. “I have a pain in 
my head.” Do not lament. “I have a pain in my 
ear.”” Do not lament. I do not say you may never 
groan; but do not groan in spirit; or, if your ser- 
vant be a long while in bringing you something to 
bind your head, do not croak and go into'hysterics, 
and say, “ Everybody hates me.” For, who would 
not hate such a one ? 

Relying for the future on these principles, walk 
erect and free; not trusting to bulk of body, like a 
wrestler ; for one should not be unconquerable in the 
sense that an ass is. 

Who then is unconquerable? He whom the inev- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 57 


itable cannot overcome. For such a person I im- 
agine every trial, and watch him as an athlete in each. 
He has been victorious in the first encounter. What 
will he do in the second? What, if he should be ex- 
hausted by the heat? What, if the field be Olympia ? 
And so in other trials. If you throw money in his 
way, he will despise it. Is he proof against the se- 
ductions of women? What if he be tested by fame, 
by calumny, by praise, by death? He is able to over- 
come them all.—If he can bear sunshine and storm, 
discouragement and fatigue, I pronounce him an ath- 
lete unconquered indeed. 


CHAPTER XIX. 
OF THE RIGHT TREATMENT OF TYRANTS. 


HEN a person is possessed of some personal 
advantage, either real or imaginary, he will 
necessarily be puffed up with it, unless he has been 
well instructed. A tyrant openly says, “I am su- 
preme over all.” And what can you bestow on me? 
Can you exempt my desires from disappointment ? 
How should you? For do you never incur what you 
shun? Are your own aims infallible? Whence 
came you by that privilege? Pray, on shipboard, do 
you trust to yourself, or to the pilot? In a chariot, 
to whom but the driver? And to whom in all other 
arts? Just the same. In what, then, does your 
power consist ? 
“¢ All men pay regard to me.” 
So do I to my desk. I wash it, and wipe it; and 
drive a nail for my oil-flask. 


58 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


‘“‘ What, then, are these things to be valued beyond 
me?” 

No; but they are of some use to me, and therefore 
] pay regard to them. Why, doI not pay regard to 
an ass? DoTI not wash his feet? DoTI not clean 
him? Do not you know, that every one pays such 
regard even to himself; and that he does it to you, 
just as he does to an ass? For who pays regard to 
you as aman? Show that. Who would wish to be 
like you? Who would desire to imitate you, as he 
would Socrates ? 

“ But I can take off your head?” 

You say rightly. JI had forgot, that one is to pay 
regard to you as to a fever, or the cholera; and that 
there should be an altar erected to you, as there is 
to the goddess Fever at Rome. 

What is it, then, that disturbs and terrifies the 
multitude? The tyrant and his guards? By no 
means. What is by nature free, cannot be disturbed 
or restrained by anything but itself. But its own 
couvictions disturb it. Thus, when the tyrant says 
to any one, “I will chain your leg,” he who chiefly 
values his leg, cries out for pity; while he who 
chiefly values his own free will, says, “If you im- 
agine it for your interest, chain it.”’ 

‘¢What! do not you care?” 

No; I do not care. 

“J will show you that I am master.” 

You? MHowshould you? Zeus has set me free. 
What! do you think he would suffer his own son 
to be enslaved? You are master of my carcass; 
take it. 

“So that, when you come into my presence, you 
pay no regard to me?” 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 59 


No, but to myself; or, if you will have me recog- 
nize you also, I will doit as if you were a piece of 
furniture. This is not selfish vanity; for every ani- 
mal is so constituted, as to do everything for itself. 
Even the sun does all for himself; and for that mat- 
ter so does even Zeus himself. But when he would 
be styled the dispenser of rain and plenty, and ‘the 
father of gods and men, you see that he cannot at- 
tain these offices and titles, unless he contributes to 
the common good. And he has universally so‘ consti- 
tuted the nature of every reasonable creature, that no 
one can attain its own good without contributing 
something for the good of all. And thus it becomes 
not selfish to do everything for one’s self. For, do 
you expect, that a man should desert himself, and his 
own concerns; when all beings have one and the 
same original instinct, self-preservation? What fol- 
lows then? That where we recognize those absurd 
convictions, which treat things outward as if they 
were the true good or evil of life, there must necessa- 
rily be a regard paid to tyrants; and I wish it were 
to tyrants only, and not to the very officers of their 
bed-chamber too. For how wise doth a man grow 
on a sudden, when Cesar has made him his flun- 
key? How immediately we say, “Felicio talked 
very sensibly to me!” I wish he were turned out of 
office, that he might once more appear to you the foo] 
he is. 

Epaphroditus owned a shoemaker; whom, because 
he was good for nothing, he sold. This very fellow 
being, by some strange luck, bought by a courtier, 
became shoemaker to Casar. Then you might have 
seen how Epaphroditus honored him. “ How is good 
Felicio, pray?”? And, if any of us asked, what the 


60 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


great man himself was about, it was answered, “ He 
is consulting about affairs with Felicio.”” Did not he 
sell him previously as good for nothing? Who then, 
has all on a sudden, made a wise man of him? This 
it is to reverence externals. 

Is any one exalted to the office of tribune? All 
who meet him congratulate him. One kisses his 
eyes, another his neck, and the slaves his hands. He 
goes to his house; finds it illuminated. He ascends 
the capitol ; offers a sacrifice. Now, who ever offered 
a sacrifice for having good desires? For conforming 
his aims to Nature? Yet we thank the gods for that 
wherein we place our good. 

A person was talking with me to-day about apply- 
ing for the priesthood in the temple of Augustus. I 
said to him, let the thing alone, friend; you will be 
at great expense for nothing. “ But my name,” said 
he, “ will be written in the annals.” Will you stand 
by, then, and tell those who read them, “I am the 
person whose name is written there?” And even if 
you could tell every one so now, what will you do 
when you are dead ?— “ My name will remain.” — 
Write it upon a stone, and it will remain just as well. 
And, pray, what remembrance will there be of you 
out of Nicopolis ? —“ But I shall wear a crown of 
gold.” —If your heart is quite set upon a crown, 
make and put on one of roses; for it will make the 
prettier appearance. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 61 


CHAPTER XX. 
IN WHAT MANNER REASON CONTEMPLATES ITSELF. 


VERY art, and every faculty, contemplates cer- 
tain things as its principal objects. Whenever, 
therefore, it is of the same nature with the objects of 
its contemplation, it necessarily contemplates itself 
too. But, where it is of a different nature, it cannot 
contemplate itself. The art of shoemaking, for in- 
stance, is exercised upon leather ; but is itself entirely 
distinct from the materials it works upon; therefore 
it does not contemplate itself. Again, grammar is 
exercised on articulate speech. Is the art of gram- 
mar itself, then, articulate speech? By no means. 
Therefore it cannot contemplate itself. To what pur- 
pose, then, is reason appointed by nature? To a 
proper use of the phenomena of existence. And 
what is reason? The art of systematizing these phe- 
nomena. Thus, by its nature, it becomes contempla- 
tive of itself too. 

Again ; what subjects of contemplation belong to 
prudence? Good and evil, and that which is indif- 
ferent. What, then, is prudence itself? Good. 
What imprudence? KEivil. 

You see, then, that it necessarily contemplates both 
itself and its contrary. Therefore, the first and great- 
est work of a philosopher is, to try and distinguish 
the phenomena of existence; and to admit none un- 
tried. Even in money, where our interest seems to 
be concerned, you see what an art we have invented, 
and how many ways an assayer uses to try its value. 
By the sight, the touch, the smell, and, lastly, the 


62 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


hearing. He throws the piece down, and attends to 
the jingle ; and is not contented with its jingling only 
once; but, by frequent attention to it, trains his ear 
for sound. So when we think it of consequence 
whether we are deceived or not, we use the utmost 
attention to discern those things, which may deceive 
us. But, yawning and slumbering over our poor neg- 
lected reason, we are imposed upon by every appear- 
ance, nor know the mischief done. Would you know, 
then, how very languidly you are affected by good and 
evil, and how vehemently by things indifferent ; con- 
sider how you feel with regard to bodily blindness, 
and how with regard to being deceived; and you 
will find, that you are far from being moved, as you 
ought, in relation to good and evil. 

“But trained powers, and much labor, and learn- 
ing, are here needed.” 

What, then? Do you expect the greatest of arts 
to be acquired by slight endeavors? And yet the 
principal doctrine of the philosophers is in itself 
short. If you have a mind to know it, read Zeno, 
and you will see. It is not a long story to say, “ Our 
end is to serve the gods,” and “ The essence of good 
consists in the proper use of the phenomena of exist- 
ence.” If you say, what then is God? What are 
phenomena? What is particular, what universal na- 
ture? Here the long story comes in. And so, if 
Epicurus should come and say, that good lies in the 
body ; here, too, it will be a long story, and it will be 
necessary to hear, what is the principal, and substan- 
tial, and essential part in us. It is unlikely, that the 
good of a snail should be placed in the shell; and, is 
it likely, that the good of a man should? You your- 
self, Epicurus, have in you something superior to this. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. + 63 


Whatis that in you, which deliberates, which exam- 
ines, which recognizes the body as the principal part? 
Why light your lamp, and labor for us, and write so 
many books? That we may not be ignorant of the 
truth? But what are we? What are we to you? 
Thus the doctrine becomes a long story. 


CHAPTER XXI. 
OF THE DESIRE OF ADMIRATION. 


HEN one maintains his proper attitude in life, 
he does not long after externals. What 
would you have, O man? 

“T am contented, if my desires and aversions are 
conformable to nature; if I seek and shun that 
which I ought, and thus regulate my purposes, my 
efforts, and my opinions.” 

Why, then, do you walk as if you had swallowed a 
ramrod ? 

“ Because I could wish moreover to have all who 
meet me, admire me, and all who follow me, cry out, 
what a great philosopher !” 

Who are those, by whom you would be admired ? 
Are they not the very people, who, you used to say, 
were mad? What, then, would you be admired by 
madmen ? 


64 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER XXII. 
OF GENERAL PRINCIPLES. 


HE same general principles are common to all 
men, nor does one such principle contradict an- 
other. For which of us does not admit, that good is 
advantageous and eligible, and in all cases to be pur- 
sued and followed? Who does not admit that jus- 
tice is fair and becoming? Where, then, arises the 
dispute? In adapting these principles to particular 
cases. As, when one cries, “‘Such a person has 
acted well; he is a gallant man”; and another, 
“No; he has acted like a fool.” Hence arises dis- 
pute among men. This is the dispute between Jews, 
and Syrians, and Egyptians, and Romans; not whether 
the right be preferable to all things, and in every in- 
stance to be sought; but whether the eating swine’s 
flesh be consistent with right, or not. This, too, you 
will find to have been the dispute between Achilles 
and Agamemnon. For call them forth. What say 
you, Agamemnon. Ought not that to be done, 
which is fit and right ? —“ Yes, surely.” — Achilles, 
what say you? Is it not agreeable to you, that what 
is right should be done ? —“ Yes; I desire it beyond 
everything.” Apply your principles then. Here be- 
gins the dispute. One says, “It is not fit that I 
should restore Chryseis to her father.” The other 
says, “Yes; but itis.” One or the other of them, 
certainly, makes a wrong eenception of the principle 
of fitness. Again, the one says: “If it be fit that I 
should give up Chryseis, it is fit, too, that I should 
take some of your prizes.” The other answers, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 65 


“What, that you should take my mistress ?’’— 
“Ay; yours.”—“ What, mine only? Must I only, 
then, lose my prize?” 

What then is it to be properly educated? To 
learn how to apply the principles of natural right to 
particular cases, and, for the rest, to distinguish that 
some things are in our power, while others are not. 
In our own power are the will, and all voluntary ac- 
tions; out of our power, the body and its parts, prop- 
erty, parents, brothers, children, country; and, in 
short, all our fellow-beings. Where, then, shall we 
place good? In what shall we define it to consist? 
In things within our own power. “But are not 
health, and strength, and life, good? And are not 
children, parents, country? You talk unreasonably.” 

Let us, then, try another point of view. Can he 
who suffers evil, and is disappointed of good, be 
happy? He cannot. And can he preserve a right 
behavior with regard to society? How is it possible 
that he should? For I am naturally led to seek my 
own highest good: If, therefore, it is my highest 
good to have an estate, it is for my good likewise to 
take it away from my neighbor. If it is my highest 
good to have a suit of clothes, it is for my good like- 
wise to steal it wherever I find it. Hence wars, sedi- 
tions, tyranny, unjust invasions. How shall I, if this 
be the case, be able, any longer, to do my duty to- 
wards Zeus? If I suffer evil, and am disappointed, 
he takes no care of me. And, what is he to me, if he 
cannot help me; or, again, what is he to me, if he 
chooses I should be in the condition that I am? 
Then I begin to hate him. What, then, do we build 
temples, do we raise statues, to Zeus, as to evil de- 
mons, as to the goddess Fever? How then is he the 

5 


66 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


preserver ; and how the dispenser of rain and plenty ? 
If we place the essence of good on any such ground, 
all this will follow. What, then, shall we do? 

This is the inquiry which interests him who philos- 
ophizes in earnest, and to some result. Do I not now 
see what is good, and what is evil, or am I mad? 
Suppose I place good only in things dependent on my 
own will? Why, every one will laugh at me. Some 
.gray-headed old fellow will come, with his fingers cov- 
ered with gold rings, and will shake his head, and say ; 
“Hark ye, child, it is fit you should learn philoso- 
phy ; but it is fit, too, you should have common-sense. 
All this is nonsense. You learn syllogisms from 
philosophers ; but how you are to act, you know bet- 
ter than they.” Then, what displeases you if I do 
know? What can I say to this unfortunate? If I 
make no answer, he will burst; so I must answer 
thus: “Bear with me, as with lovers. Granted; I 
am not myself. I have lost my senses.” 


CHAPTER XXIII, 
AGAINST EPICURUS. 


VEN Epicurus is sensible that we are by nature 

sociable beings ; but having once placed our good 
in the mere outward shell, he can say nothing after- 
wards inconsistent with that. For again, he strenu- 
ously maintains, that we ought not to admire, or ac- 
cept, anything separated from the nature of good. 
And he is in the right to maintain it. But how, 
then, arise any affectionate anxieties, unless there 
be such a thing as natural affection towards our 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 67 


offspring? Then why do you, Epicurus, dissuade a 
Wise man from bringing up children? Why are you 
afraid, that, upon their account, he may fall into 
anxieties? Does he fall into any for a mouse, that 
feeds within his house? What is it to him, if a little 
mouse bewails itself there? But Epicurus knew, 
that, if once a child is born, it is no longer in our 
power not to love and be solicitous for it. On the 
same grounds he says, that a wise man will not en- 
gage himself in public business, knowing very well 
what must follow. If men are only so many flies, 
why should he not engage in it? 

And does be, who knows all this, dare to forbid us 
to bring up children? Not even a sheep, or a wolf, 
deserts its offspring; and shall man? What would 
you have? That we should be as silly as sheep? 
Yet even these do not desert their offspring. Or as 
savage as wolves? Neither do these desert them. 
Pray, who would mind you, if he saw his child fallen 
upon the ground and crying? For my part, I am of 
opinion, that your father and mother, even if they 
could have foreseen that you would have been the 
author of such doctrines, would not have thrown you 


away. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 
HOW WE OUGHT TO STRUGGLE WITH DIFFICULTIES. 


IFFICULTIES are things that show what men 
are. For the future, in case of any difficulty, 
remember, that God, like a gymnastic trainer, has 
pitted you against a rough antagonist. For what 
end? That you may be an Olympic conqueror; and 


68 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


this cannot be without toil. No man, in my opinion, 
has a more profitable difficulty on his hands than you 
have; provided you will but use it, as an athletic 
champion uses his antagonist. 

Suppose we were to send you as a scout to Rome. 
But no one ever sends a timorous scout, who, when 
he only hears a noise, or sees a shadow, runs back 
frightened, and says, ‘The enemy is at hand.” So 
now, if you should come and tell us: “ Things are in 
a fearful way at Rome; death is terrible, banishment 
terrible, calumny terrible, poverty terrible ; run, good 
people, the enemy is at hand ”’; — we will answer: Get 
you gone, and prophesy for yourself; our only fault 
is, that we have sent such a scout. Diogenes was 
sent a scout before you, but he told us other tidings. 
He says that death is no evil, for it is nothing base; 
that calumny is only the noise of madmen. And 
what account did this spy give us of pain, of pleasure, 
of poverty? He says, that to be naked is better than 
a purple robe ; to sleep upon the bare ground, the soft- 
est bed; and gives a proof of all he says by his own 
courage, tranquillity, and freedom; and, moreover, 
by a healthy and robust body. ‘There is no enemy 
near,” he says. “All is profound peace.” How 
so, Diogenes? ‘Look upon me,” he says. “Am 1 
hurt? Am I wounded? Have I run away from 
any one?” This is a scout worth having. But you 
come, and tell us one thing after another. Go back 
and look more carefully, and without fear. 

“ What shall I do, then?” 

What do you do when you come out of a ship? 
Do you take away with you the rudder, or the oars ? 
What do you take, then? Your own, your bundle 
and your flask. So, in the present case, if you will 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 69 


but remember what is your own, you will not covet 
what belongs to others. If some tyrant bids you put 
off your consular robe? “ Well, I am in my equestri- 
an robe.” Put off that too. “I have only my coat.” 
Put off that too. ‘Well, I am naked.” I am not 
yet satisfied. ‘Then e’en take my whole body. IfI 
can throw off a paltry body, am I any longer afraid 
of a tyrant?” 

“But such a one will not leave me his heir.’ 
What, then, have I forgotten, that such things are 
never really mine? How then do we call them 
ours? As with a bed, in an inn. If the landlord, 
when he dies, leaves you the bed, well and good; 
but if to another, it will be his, and you will seek 
one elsewhere ; and, consequently, if you do not find 
one, you will sleep upon the ground; only sleep fear- 
lessly and profoundly, and remember, that tragedies 
find their theme among the rich, and kings, and 
tyrants. No poor man fills any other place in one, 
than as part of the chorus; whereas kings begin, 
indeed, with prosperity : ‘“ Crown the palace ”; — but 
continue about the third and fourth act: “ Alas, 
Citheron! Why didst thon receive me!” * Where 
are thy crowns, wretch ; where is thy diadem? Can- 
not thy guards help thee ? 

Whenever you are brought into any such society, 
think then that you meet a tragic actor, or rather, 
not an actor, but Gdipus himself. “ But such a one 
is happy. He walks with a numerous train.” Well; 
I too walk with a numerous train. 

But remember the principal thing; that the door 
is open. Do not be more fearful than children ; but 
as they, when the play does not please them, say, “I 


* Sophocles, Gidipus Tyrannus, V. 1391. — H. 


70 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


will play 60 longer”; so do you, in the same case, 
say, “I will play no longer”; and go; but, if you 
stay, do not complain. 


CHAPTER XXV. 
ON THE SAME SUBJECT. 


F these things are true; and if we are not stupid, 
or insincere, when we say, that the good or ill of 
man lies within his own will, and that all beside is 
nothing to us; why are we still troubled? Why do 
we still fear? What truly concerns us is in no one’s 
power: what is in the power of others concerns not 
us. What embarrassment have we left ? 

“ But you must direct me.” 

Why should I direct you? Has not Zeus directed 
you? Has he not given you what is your own, inca- 
pable of restraint or hindrance ; and what is not your 
own, liable to both? What directions, then, what 
orders, have you brought from him? “ By all means 
guard what is your own: what belongs to others do 
not covet. Honesty is your own: a sense of virtu- . 
ous shame is your own. Who, then, can deprive you 
of these? Who can restrain you from making use 
of them, but yourself? And how do you do it? 
When you make that your concern which is not truly 
your own, you lose that which is.” Having such 
precepts and directions from Zeus, what sort do you 
still want from me? Am I better than He, or more 
worthy of credit? If you observe these precepts, 
what others do you need? Are not these His? 
Apply the recognized principles; apply the demon- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. . 71 


strations of philosophers; apply what you have often 
“heard, and what you have said yourself; what you 
have read, and what you have carefully studied. 

How long is it right to devote one’s self to these 
things and not break up the game? 

As long as it goes on well. A king is chosen at 
the Saturnalian Festival, supposing that it was agreed 
to play at that game: he orders: “ Do you drink ; you 
mix the wine; you sing; you go; you come.” I 
obey ; that the game may not be broken up by my 
fault. 

(Then he orders] ‘I bid you think yourself to be 
unhappy.” I do not think so; and who shall compel 
me to think so? 

Again; suppose we agreed to play Agamemnon 
and Achilles. He who is appointed for Agamemnon 
says to me, “Go to Achilles, and force away Bri- 
seis.” I go. “Come.” I come. We should deal 
with life as with these imaginary orders. 

“ Suppose it to be night.” Well; suppose it. “Is 
it day then?” No: for I admitted the hypothesis, 
that it was night. ‘Suppose that you think it to be 
night.” Well; suppose it. “But you must really 
think that it is night.” That by no means follows 
from the hypothesis, Thus it is in the case illus- 
trated. Suppose you have ill luck. Suppose it. 
“ Are you then unlucky?” Yes. “Are you thor- 
oughly unfortunate?”’ Yes, ‘Well; but you must 
really regard yourself as miserable.” But this is no 
part of the assumption, and there is a power who for- 
bids me to admit that. 

How far then are we to carry such analogies? As 
far as is useful; that is, till-we go farther than is rea- 
souable and fit. 


12 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Moreover, some are peevish and fastidious, and 
say, I cannot dine with such a fellow, to be obliged 
to hear him all day recounting how he fought in 
Mysia. “I told you, my friend, how I gained the 
eminence.” There I begin to suffer another siege. 
But another says, “I had rather get a dinner, and 
hear him prate as much as he pleases.” 

Do you decide between these opinions; but do not 
let it be with depression and anxiety, and the as- 
sumption that you are miserable ; for no one compels 
you to that. Is there smoke in my house? If it be 
moderate, I will stay; if very great, I will go out. 
For you must always remember, and hold to this, 
that the door is open. ‘ You are forbidden to live 
at Nicopolis.” I will not live there. “ Nor at Ath- 
ens.” Well, nor atAthens. “Nor at Rome.” Nor 
at Rome. “ But you shall live at Gyaros.”* I will 
live there. But suppose that living at Gyaros seems 
to me like living in a great smoke. I can then retire 
where no one can forbid me to live, for it is an abode 
open to all; and put off my last garment, this poor 
body of mine; beyond this, no one has any power 
over me. : 

Thus Demetrius said to Nero: ‘ You sentence me 
to death ; and Nature you.” IfI prize my body first, 
I have surrendered myself as a slave; if my estate, 
the same; for I at once betray where I am vulnera- 
ble. Just as when a reptile pulls in his head, I bid 
you strike that part of him which he guards; and 
be you assured, that wherever you show a desire to 
guard yourself, there your master will attack you. 


* An island in the Avjgean Sea, to which the Romans used to ban- 
ish criminals. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 73 


Remember but this, and whom will you any longer 
flatter or fear ? 

“But I want to sit where the senators do.” 

Do not you see, that by this you incommode and 
torment yourself? 

*¢' Why, how else shall I see the show in the Amphi- 
theatre advantageously ?” 

Do not insist on seeing it, O man! and you will 
not be incommoded. Why do you vex: yourself? 
Or wait a little while; and when the show is over, go 
sit in the senators’ places, and sun yourself. For re- 
member, that this holds universally ; we incommode 
and torment ourselves ; that is, our own preconceived 
notions do it for us. What is it to be reviled, for 
instance? Stand by a stone, and revile it; and what 
will you get by it? If you, therefore, would listen 
only as a stone, what would your reviler gain? But, 
if the reviler has the weakness of the reviled for a 
vantage-ground, then he carries his point. 

“Strip him,” [bids the tyrant]. What mean you 
by him? Take my clothes, strip them, at your pleas- 
ure. “I meant only to insult you.” Much good 
may it do you. 

These things were the study of Socrates; and, by 
these means, he always preserved the same counte- 
nance. Yet we had rather exercise and study any- 
thing, than how to become unrestrained and free. 
“But the philosophers talk paradoxes.” And are 
there not paradoxes in other arts? What is more 
paradoxical, than to prick any one’s eye, that he may 
see? Should one tell this to one ignorant of surgery, 
would not he laugh at him? What wonder then, if, 
in philosophy also, many truths appear paradoxes to 
the ignorant ? 


74. THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER XXVI 
WHAT THE RULE OF LIFE I8. 


S some one was reading hypothetical proposi- 

tions, Epictetus remarked that it was a rule in 
these to admit whatever was in accordance with the 
hypothesis ; but much more a rule in life, to do what 
was in accordance with nature. For, if we desire in 
every matter and on every occasion to conform to na- 
ture; we must, on every occasion, evidently make it 
our aim, neither to omit anything thus conformable, 
nor to admit anything inconsistent. Philosophers, 
therefore, first exercise us in theory, which is the 
more easy task, and then lead us to the more diffi- 
cult; for in theory, there is nothing to hinder our 
following what we are taught, but in life there are 
many things to draw us aside. It is ridiculous then 
to say, we must begin with these applications, for it is 
not easy to begin with the most difficult; and this 
excuse children should make to those parents who 
dislike that they should study philosophy. ‘Am I 
to blame then, sir, and ignorant of my duty, and of 
what is incumbent on me? If this is neither to be 
learned, nor taught, why do you find fault with me? 
If it is to be taught, pray teach me yourself; or, if 
you cannot, let me learn it from those who profess 
to understand it. For what think you; that I vol- 
untarily fall into evil, and miss good? Heaven for- 
bid! What, then, is the cause of my faults? Ig. 
norance. Are you not willing, then, that I should 
get rid of my ignorance? Who was ever taught the 
art of music, or navigation, by anger? Do you ex- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. %5 


pect, then, that your anger should teach me the art 
of living?” 

This, however, can properly be said only by one 
who is really in earnest. But he who reads these 
things, and applies to the philosophers, merely for 
the sake of showing, at some entertainment, that he 
understands hypothetical reasonings; what aim has 
he but to be admired by some senator, who happezs 
to sit near him?* Great possessions may be won by 
such aims as that, but what we hold as wealth passes 
there for folly. It is‘hard, therefore, to overcome by 
appearances, where vain things thus pass for great. 

I once saw a person weeping and embracing the 
knees of Epaphroditus; and deploring his hard for- 
tune, that he had not more than 150,000 drachmex 
left. What said Epaphroditus then? Did he laugh 
at him, as we should do? No; but cried out with 
astonishment: “ Poor man! How could you be silent 
under it? How could you bear it?” 

The first step, therefore, towards becoming a phi- 
losopher, is to be sensible in what state the ruling 
faculty of the mind is; for on knowing it to be weak, 
no person will immediately employ it in great at- 
tempts. But, for want of this, some, who can scarce 
digest a crumb, will yet buy and swallow whole trea- 
tises ; and so they throw them up again, or cannot di- 
gest them; and then come colics, fluxes, and fevers. 
Such persons ought to consider what they can bear. 
Indeed, it is easy to convince an ignorant person, so 
far as concerns theory; but in matters relating to 


* This passage is omitted as inexplicable by Mrs. Carter. Schweig- 
haeuser says, “Tentare interpretationem possum; praestare non 
possum.” A passage just below I also have omitted, as the text is 
admitted to be in a hopeless state. — H. 


76 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


life, no one offers himself to conviction, and we hate 
those who have convinced us. Socrates used to say, 
that we ought not to live a life unexamined.* 


CHAPTER XXVII. 


OF THE VARIED APPEARANCES OF THINGS TO THE MIND, 
AND WHAT MEANS ARE AT HAND BY WHICH TO REGU- 
LATE THEM. 


PPEARANCES to the mind are of four kinds. 
Things either are what they appear to be; 
or they neither are, nor appear to be; or they are, 
and do not appear to be; or they are not, and yet 
appear to be. Rightly to aim, in all these cases, is 
the wise man’s task. Whatever unduly constrains 
us, to that a remedy must be applied. If the sophis- 
tries of Pyrrhonism, or the Academy, constrain us, 
the remedy must be applied there; if spevious ap- 
pearances, by which things seem to be good which 
are not so, let us seek for a remedy there. If it be 
custom which constrains us, we must endeavor to 
find a remedy against that. 
“ What remedy is to be found against custom ?” 
Establish a contrary custom. You hear the vul- 
gar say, “Such a one, poor soul! is dead.” Well, 
his father died: his mother died. “ Ay, but he was 
cut off in the flower of his age, and in a foreign 
land.” Observe these contrary ways of speaking ; 
and abandon such expressions. Oppose to one cus- 
tom, a contrary custom ; to sophistry, the art of rea- 
soning, and the frequent use and exercise of it. 


* Plato, Apologia, I. 28. —H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. var 


Against specious appearances we must set clear con- 
victions, bright and ready for use. When death ap- 
pears as an evil, we ought immediately to remember, 
that evils are things to be avoided, but death is inev- 
itable. For what can I do, or where can I fly from 
it? Let me suppose myself to be Sarpedon, the son 
of Jove, that I may speak as nobly. “I go either to 
excel, or to give another the occasion to excel.”* If 
I can achieve nothing myself, I will not grudge an- 
other his achievement. 

But suppose this to be a strain too high for us; do 
not these following thoughts befitus ? Whither shall 
I fly from death ? Show me the place, show me the 
people, to whom I may have recourse, whom death 
does not overtake. Show me the charm to avoid it. 
If there be none, what would you have me do? I 
cannot escape death; but cannot I escape the dread 
of it? Must I die trembling, and lamenting? For 
the very origin of the disease lies in wishing for some- 
thing that is not obtained. Under the influence of 
this, if I can make outward things conform to my 
own inclination, I do it; if not, I feel inclined to tear 
out the eyes of whoever hinders me. For it is the 
nature of man not to endure the being deprived of 
good; not to endure the falling into evil. ' And so, 
at last, when I can neither control events, nor tear 
out the eyes of him who hinders me, I sit down, and 
groan, and revile him whom I can; Zeus, and the 
rest of the gods. For what are they to me, if they 
take no care of me? 

“Oh! but then you will be impious.” 

What then? Can I be in a worse condition than I 
am now? In general, remember this, that unless we 


* Imitated from Iliad, xii. 328. —H. 


78 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


place our religion and our treasure in the same thing, 
religion will always be sacrificed. 

Have these things no weight? Let a Pyrrhonist, 
or an Academic, come and oppose them. For my 
part, I have neither leisure nor ability to stand up as 
an advocate for common sense. Even if the business 
were concerning an estate, I should call in another 
advocate. To what advocate, then, shall I now ap- 
peal? I will leave it to any one who may be upon 
the spot. Thus I may not be able to explain how sen- 
sation takes place, whether it be diffused universally, 
or reside in a particular part; for I find perplexities 
in either case; but that you and I are not the same 
person, I very exactly know. 

“ How so?” 

Why, I never, when I have a mind to swallow any- 
thing, carry it to your mouth; but myown. I never, 
when I wanted bread, seized a broom instead, but 
went directly to the bread as I needed it. You who 
deny all evidence of the senses, do you act otherwise ? 
Which of you, when he wished to go into a bath, ever 
went into a mill? 

“Why then, must not we, to the utmost, defend 
these points? stand by common sense; be fortified 
against everything that opposes it?” * 

Who denies that? But it must be done by him 
who has ability and leisure to spare; but he, who is 


* This seems to be said by one of the hearers, who wanted to have 
the absurdities of the sceptics confuted and guarded against by regu- 
lar argument. Epictetus allows this to be right, for such as have 
abilities and leisure; but recommends in others the more necessary 
task of curing their own moral disorders, and insinuates that the 
Mere common occurrences of life are sufficicnt to overthrow the no 
tions of the Pyrrhonists. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 79 


full of trembling and perturbation, and inward disor- 
ders of heart, must first employ his time about some- 
thing else. 


CHAPTER XXVIII. 


THAT WE OUGHT NOT TO BE ANGRY WITH MANKIND. 
WHAT THINGS ARE LITTLE, WHAT GREAT, AMONG 
MEN. 


HAT is the cause of assent to anything? Its 
appearing to be true. It is not possible, 
therefore, to assent to what appears to be not true. 
Why? Because it is the very nature of the under- 
standing to agree to truth, to be dissatisfied with 
falsehood, and to suspend its belief, in doubtful cases. 

What is the proof of this? 

Persuade yourself, if you can, that it is now night. 
Impossible. Dissuade yourself from the belief that it 
is day. Impossible. Persuade yourself that the 
number of the stars is even or odd. Impossible. 

When any one, then, assents to what is false, be 
assured that he doth not wilfully assent to it, as false ; 
for, as Plato affirms, the soul is unwillingly deprived 
of truth ; * but what is false appears to him to be true. 
Well, then; have we, in actions, anything correspon- 
dent to this distinction between true and false ? 

Right and wrong; advantageous and disadvanta- 
geous; desirable and undesirable ; and the like. 

A person then, cannot think a thing truly advanta- 
geous to him, and not choose it? 

* This is not « literal quotation from Plato, but similar passages 
are to be fonnd in his Laws, ix.5; Sophist, § 29; Protagoras, § 87, 
ete. — H. 


80 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


He cannot. But how says Medea? 


‘I know what evils wait upon my purpose; 
But wrath is stronger than this will of mine.” * 


Was it that she thought the very indulgence of her 
rage, and the punishing her husband, more advanta- 
geous than the preservation of her children? Yes; 
but she is deceived. Show clearly to her that she is 
deceived, and she will forbear; but, till you have 
shown it, what has she to follow, but what appears to 
herself? Nothing. 

Why, then, are you angry with her, that the un- 
happy woman is deceived in the most important 
points, and instead of a human creature, becomes a 
viper? Why do not you rather, as we pity the blind 
and lame, so likewise pity those who are blinded and 
lamed in their superior faculties? Whoever, there- 
fore, duly remembers, that the appearance of things 
to the mind is the standard of every action to man ; 
that this is either right or wrong, and, if right, he is 
without fault, if wrong, he himself suffers punish- 
ment; for that one man cannot be the person de- 
ceived, and another the only sufferer ;— such a per- 
son will not be outrageous and angry at any one; 
will not revile, or reproach, or hate, or quarrel with 
any one. 

“So then, have all the great and dreadful deeds, 
that have been done in the world, no other origin 
than [true or false] appearances? ” 

Absolutely, no other. The Iliad consists of noth- 
ing but such appearances and their results. It 
seemed to Paris that he should carry off the wife of 
Menelaus. It seemed to Helen, that she should fol- 


* Euripides, Medea, 1087. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 81 


low him. If, then, it had seemed to Menelaus, that 
it was an advantage to be robbed of such a wife, 
what could have happened? Not only the Iliad had 
been lost, but the Odyssey too. 

“ Do such great events, then, depend on so small a 
cause ?” ; 

What events, then, call you great? 

« Wars and seditions; the destruction of numbers 
of men, and the overthrow of cities.” 

And what in all this is great? Nothing. ‘What is 
great in the death of numbers of oxen, numbers of 
sheep, or in the burning or pulling down numbers of 
nests of storks.or swallows ? 

“ Are these things then similar?” 

They are. The bodies of men are destroyed, and 
the bodies of sheep and oxen. The houses of men 
are burnt, and the nests of storks. What is there so 
great or fearful in all this? Pray, show me what 
difference there is between the house of a man and 
the nest of a stork, considered as a habitation, except 
that houses are built with beams, and tiles, and 
bricks; and nests with sticks and clay ? 

‘What, then, are a stork and a man similar? 
What do you mean?” 

Similar in body. 

“Ts there no difference, then, between a man and 
a stork?” 

Yes, surely ; but not in these things. 

“In what then ?” 

Inquire; and you will find, that the difference lies 
in something else. See whether it be not in ration- 
ality of action, in social instincts, fidelity, honor, 
providence, judgment. 


“‘ Where then is the real good or evil of man?” 
6 


82 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Just where this difference lies. If this distinguish- 
ing trait is preserved, and remains well fortified, and 
neither honor, fidelity, nor judgment is destroyed, 
then he himself is likewise saved; but when any one 
of these is lost or demolished, he himself is lost also. 
In this do all great events consist. Paris, they say, 
was undone, because the Greeks invaded Troy, and 
laid it waste, and his family were slain in battle. By 
no means; for no one is undone by an action not his 
own. All that was only like laying waste the nests 
of storks. But his true undoing was, when he lost 
modesty, faith, honor, virtue. When was Achilles 
undone? When Patroclus died? By no means. 
But when he gave himself up to rage ; when he wept 
over a girl; when he forgot, that he came there, not 
to win mistresses, but to fight. This is hnman undo- 
ing ; this is the siege; this the overthrow ; when right 
principles are ruined and destroyed. 

“ But when wives and children are led away cap- 
tives, and the men themselves killed, are not these 
evils?” 

Whence do you conclude them such? Pray in- 
form me, in my turn. 

“Nay ; but whence do you affirm that they are not 
evils?” 

Recur to the rules. Apply your principles. One 
cannot sufficiently wonder at what happens among 
men. When we would judge of light and heavy, 
we do not judge by guess; nor when we judge of 
straight and crooked; and, in general, when it con- 
cerns us to know the truth on any special point, no 
one of us will do anything by guess. But where the 
first and principal source of right or wrong action 
is concerned, of being prosperous or unprosperous, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 83 


happy or unhappy; there only do we act rashly, and 
by guess. Nowhere anything like a balance ; nowhere 
anything like a rule; but something seems thus or 
so to me, and I at once act accordingly. For am I 
better than Agamemnon or Achilles; that they, by 
following what seemed best to them, should do and 
suffer so many things, and yet that seeming should 
not suffice me? And what tragedy hath any other 
origin? The Atreus of Euripides, what is it? Seem- 
ing. The Cidipus of Sophocles? Seeming. The 
Phenix? The Hippolytus? All seeming. Who 
then, think you, can escape this influence? What 
are they called who follow every seeming? Madmen. 
Yet do we, then, behave otherwise ? 


CHAPTER XXIX. 
OF COURAGE. 


HE essence of good and evil is a certain disposi- 
tion of the will. 

What are things outward then? 

Materials on which the.will may act, in attaining 
its own good or evil. 

How, then, will it attain good ? 

If it be not dazzled by its own materials; for right 
principles concerning these materials keep the will in 
a good state; but perverse and distorted principles, 
in a bad one. This law hath God ordained, who says, 
“If you wish for good, receive it from yourself.” 
You say, No; but from another. “Nay; but from 
yourself.” 

Accordingly, when a tyrant threatens, aud sends for 


84 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


me, I say, Against what is your threatening pointed ? 
If he says, “I will chain you”; I answer, It is my 
hands and feet that you threaten. If he says, “I 
‘will cut off your head’’; I answer, It is my head 
‘that you threaten. If he says, “I will throw you 
jinto prison ’’; I answer, It is the whole of this paltry 
‘body that you threaten ; and, if he threatens banish- 
‘ment, just the same. 

“ Does not he threaten you, then ?” 

IfI am persuaded, that these things are nothing to 
me, he does not; but, if I fear any of them, it is me 
that he ‘threatens. Who is it, after all, that I fear? 
The master of what? Of things in my own power? 
Of these no one is the master. Of things not in my 
power? And what are these to me? 

“ What, then! do you philosophers teach us a con- 
tempt of kings? ” 

By no means. Which of us teaches any one to con- 
tend with them, about things of which they have the 
command? Take my body; take my possessions; 
‘take my:reputation ; take away even my friends. If 
I persuade any one to claim these things as his own, 
you may justly accuseme. “Ay; but I would com- 
mand ‘your principles too.” And who hath given 
you that power? How can you conquer the principle 
of another? “ By applying terror, I will conquer it.’’ 
Do not you see, that what conquers itself, is not con- 
quered by another? And nothing but itself can con- 
quer the will. -Hence, too, the most excellent and 
equitable law of God ; that the ‘better should always 
prevail over the worse. Ten are better than one. 

“ For what purpose ? ” 

For chaining, killing, dragging where they please; 
for taking away an estate. Thus ten conquer one, 
in the cases wherein they are better. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 85 


“Tn what, then, are they worse ?” 

When the one has right principles, and the others: 
have not. For can they conquer in this case? How 
should they? If we were weighed in a scale, must 
not the heavier outweigh ? 

“ How then came Socrates to suffer such things: 
from the Athenians?” 

O foolish man! what mean you by Socrates? Ex- 
press the fact as it is. Are you surprised that the. 
mere body of Socrates should be carried away, and! 
dragged to prison, by such as were stronger; that it 
should be poisoned by hemlock and die? Do these 
things appear wonderful to you? These things un-. 
just? Is-it for such things as these that you accuse 
God? Had Socrates, then, no compensation for 
them? In what, then, to him, did the essence of 
good consist? Whom shall we regard ; you, or him ?. 
And what says he? “ Anytus and Melitus may in- 
deed kill; but hurt me they cannot.” And again: 
“ Tf it so pleases God, so let it be.” 

But show me, that he who has the worse principles 
can get the advantage over him who has the better. 
You never will show it, nor anything like it; for the 
Law of Nature and of God is this, —let the better 
always prevail over the worse. 

“In what?” 

In that wherein it is better. One body may be 
stronger than another ; many, than one; and a thief, 
than one who is not a thief. Thus I, for instance, 
lost my lamp; because the thief was better at keep- 
ing awake than I. But for that lamp he paid the 
price of becoming a thief; for that lamp he lost his 
virtue and became like a wild beast. This seemed to 
him a good bargain ; and so let it be! 


86 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


But some one takes me by the collar, and drags me 
to the forum; and then all the rest cry out, “ Phi- 
losopher, what good do your principles do you? See, 
you are being dragged to prison; see, you are going 
to lose your head!” And, pray, what rule of philos- 
ophy could I contrive, that, when a stronger than my- 
self lays hold on my collar, I should not be dragged ? 
Or that, when ten men pul] me at once, and throw 
me into prison, I should not be thrown there? But 
have I learned nothing, then? I have learned to 
know, whatever happens, that, if it concerns not my 
will, it is nothing to me. Have my principles, then, 
done me no good? What, then! do I seek for any- 
thing else to do me good, but what I have learned ? 
Afterwards, as I sit in prison, I say, He who has 
made all this disturbance neither recognizes any 
guidance, nor heeds any teaching, nor is it any con- 
cern to him, to know what philosophers say, or do. 
Let him alone. 

“ Come forth again from prison.” If you have no 
further need for me in prison, I will come out; if you 
want me again, I will return. “For how long?” 
Just so long as reason requires I should continue in 
this body; when that is ‘over, take it, and fare ye 
well. Only Jet us not act inconsiderately, nor from 
cowardice, nor on slight grounds, since that would be 
contrary to the will of God ; for he hath need of such 
a world, and such beings to live on earth. But, if 
he sounds a retreat, as he did to Socrates, we are to 
obey him when he sounds it, as our General. 

“Well; but can these things be explained to the 
multitude ?” ; 

“To what purpose? Is it not sufficient to be con- 
vinced one’s self? When children come to us clap- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 87 


ping their hands, and saying, “To-morrow is the 
good feast of Saturn”; do we tell them that good 
doth not consist in such things? By no means; but 
we clap our hands also. Thus, when you are unable 
to convince any one, consider him as a child, and clap 
your hands with him; or, if you will not do that, at 
least hold your tongue. These things we ought to 
remember ; and, when we are called to any trial, to 
know, that an opportunity is come of showing wheth- 
er we have been well taught. For he who goes from 
a philosophical Iecture to a difficult point of practice, 
is like a young man who has been studying to solve 
syllogisms. If you propose an easy one, he says, 
“Give me rather a fine intricate one, that I may try 
may strength.” Thus athletic champioris are dis- 
pleased with a slight antagonist. “He cannot lift 
me,” says one. Is this a youth of spirit? No; for 
when the occasion calls upon him, he may begin cry- 
ing, and say, “‘ I wanted to learn a little longer first.” 
Learn what? If you did not learn these things to 
show them in practice, why did you learn them? 

I trust there must be some one among you, sitting 
here, who feels secret pangs of impatience, and says: 
“‘ When will such a trial come to my share, as hath 
now fallen to his? Must I sit wasting may life in a 
corner, when I might be crowned at Olympia? When 
will any one bring the news of such a combat, for 
me?” Such should be the disposition of you all. 
Even among the gladiators of Cesar, there are some 
who bear it very ill, that they are not brought upon 
the stage, and matched; and who offer vows to God, 
and address the officers, begging to fight. And will 
none among you appear such? I would willingly 
take a vovage on purpose to see how a champion of 
mine acts; how he meets his occasion. 


88 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


_ This is not the contest I would choose, say you. 
Is it in your power, then, to make the selection ? 
Such a body is given you, such parents, such broth- 
ers, such a country, and such a rank in it; and 
then you come to me, to change the conditions! 
Have you not abilities to manage that which is given 
you? You should say to me, “It is your business 
to propose ; mine, to treat the subject well.” No; but 
you say, “Do not meet me with such a perplexity, 
but such a one; do not offer such an obstacle to me, 
but such a one.” There will be a time, I suppose, 
when tragediaus will fancy themselves to be mere 
masks, and buskins, and long train. These things 
are your materials, man, and your stage-properties. 
Speak something ; that we may know whether you 
are a tragedian, or a buffoon; for both have all the 
fest in common. Suppose any one should take away 
his buskins and his mask, and bring him upon the 
stage, in his common dress, is the tragedian lost, or 
does he remain? If he has a voice, he remains. 
“ Here, this instant, take upon you the command.” 
I take it; and, taking it, I show how a skilful man 
performs the part. ‘Now lay aside your robe; put 
on rags, and come upon the stage in that character.” 
What then? Is it not in my power to express the 
eharacter by a suitable voice ? 

“Tn what character do you now appear?” Asa 
witness summoned by God. “Come you, then, and 
bear witness for me; for you are a fit witness to be 
produced by me. Is anything which is inevitable, to 
be classed as either good or evil? Do I hurt any 
one? Have I made the good of each individual to 
test on any one, but himself? What evidence do 
you give for God?” 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 89 


“T am in a miserable condition, O Lord; 1 am un- 
done: no mortal cares forme; no mortal gives me 
anything; all blame me; all speak ill of me.” 

Is this the evidence you are to give? And will 
you bring disgrace upon his summons, who hath con- 
ferred such an honor upon you, and thought you 
worthy of being produced as a witness in such a 
cause ? 

But some one in authority has given a sentence. 
“T judge you to be impious and profane.” What 
has befallen you? ——I have been judged to be impi- 
ous and profane.—Anything else ?— Nothing. — 
Suppose he had passed his judgment upon any pro- 
cess of reasoning, and pronounced it to be a false 
conclusion, that, if it be day, it is light ; what would 
have befallen the proposition? In this case, who is 
judged, who condemned ; the proposition, or he who 
eannot understand it? Does he know, who claims 
the power of ruling in your case, what pious or impi- 
ous means? Has he made it his study or learned it ?. 
Where? From whom? A musician would not re- 
gard him, if he pronounced bass to be treble; nor a 
mathematician, if he passed sentence, that lines 
drawn from the centre to the circumference, are not 
equal. And shall he, who is instructed in the truth, 
respect an ignorant man, when he pronounces upon 
pious and impious, just and unjust ? 

“Q the persecutions to which the wise are ex- 
posed!’ Is it here that you have learned this talk ? 
Why do not you leave such pitiful discourse to idle, 
pitiful fellows; and let them sit in a corner, and 
receive some little mean pay; or grumble, that no- 
body gives them anything? But do you come, and 
make some use of what you have learned. It is not 


90 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


reasonings that are wanted now, for there are books 
stuffed full of stoical reasonings. 

“ What is wanted, then?” 

The man who shall apply them; whose actions 
may bear testimony: to his doctrines. Assume this 
character for me, that we may no longer make use in 
the schools of the examples of the ancients, but may 
have some examples of our own. ; 

“To whom, then, does the contemplation of these 
abstractions belong ?” 

To any one who has leisure for them. For man is 
a being fond of contemplation. But it is shameful to 
take only such view of things as truant slaves take 
of a play. We ought to sit calmly, and listen, 
whether to the actor, or to the musician; and not do 
like those poor fellows, who come in and admire the 
actor, constantly glancing about them, and then, if 
any one happens to name their master, run fright- 
ened away. It is shameful for a philosopher, thus to 
contemplate the works of nature. What, in this par- 
allel case, stands for the master? Man is not the 
master of man; but death, and life, and pleasure, 
and pain; for without these, bring even Cesar to 
me, and you will see how intrepid I shall be. But, if 
he comes thundering and lightening with these, and 
these are the objects of my terror; what do I else, 
but, like the truant slave, acknowledge my master? 
While I have any respite from these, as the truant 
comes into the theatre, so I bathe, drink, sing; but 
all with terror and anxiety. But, if I free myself 
from my masters, that is, from such things-as render 
a master terrible, what trouble, what master have I 
remaining ? 

‘Shall we then insist upon these things with all 
men?” 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 91 


No. But make allowance for the ignorant, and 
say, This poor man advises me to what he thinks 
good for himself. I excuse him; for Socrates, too, 
excused the jailer, who wept when he was to drink 
the poison; and said, “ How heartily he sheds tears 
for us.” Was it to him that Socrates said, “ For this 
reason we sent the women out of the way”? No; 
but to his friends; to such as were capable of hear- 
ing it; while he humored the other, as a child. 


CHAPTER XXX. 
WEAPONS READY FOR DIFFICULT OCCASIONS. 


HEN you are going before any of the great, re- 
member, that there is another, who sees from 
above, what passes, and whom you ought to please, 
rather than man. He, therefore, asks you: 
“In the schools, what did you use to call exile, and 
prison, and chains, and death, and calumny ?” 
I? Indifferent things. 
“ What, then, do you call them now? Are they 
at all changed?” 
No. 
“‘ Are you changed, then ?” 
No. 
“Tell me, then, what things are indifferent.” 
Things not dependent on our own will. 
“ What is the inference ?” 
Things not dependent on my own will are nothing 
to me. 
“ Tell me, likewise, what appeared to be the good 
of man.” 


92 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Rectitude of will, and to understand the appear- 
ances of things. 

“ What his end?” 

To follow Thee. 

“Do you say the same things now, too?” 

Yes. Ido say the same things, even now. 

Well, go in then boldly, and mindful of these 
things ; and you will show the difference between the 
instructed and the ignorant. I protest, I think you 
will then have such thoughts as these: “ Why do 
we provide so many and great resources for noth- 
ing? Is the power, the antechamber, the attend- 
ants, the guards, no more than this? Is it for these, 
that I have listened to so many dissertations ? These 
are nothing ; and yet I had qualified myself as for 
some great encounter.” 


BOOK II. 


CHAPTER I. 
THAT COURAGE IS NOT INCONSISTENT WITH CAUTION. 


HERE is an assertion of the philosophers which 

S. may perhaps appear a paradox to many ; yet let 

us fairly examine whether it be true: —-that it is 
possible in all things, to act at once with caution and 
courage. For caution seems, in some measure, con- 
trary to courage; and contraries are by no means 
consistent. The appearance of a paradox in the pres- 
ent case seems to me to arise as follows. If indeed 
we assert, that courage and caution are to he used in 
the same instances, we might justly be accused of 
uniting contradictions; but, in the way that we af- 
firm it, where is the absurdity? ‘For, if what has 
been so often said, and so often demonstrated, be cer- 
tain, that the essence of good.and evil consists in the 
use of things as they appear, and that things inevi- 
table are not to be classed either as good or evil, 
what paradox do the philosophers.assert, if they say, 
“ Where events are inevitable, meet them with cour- 
age, but otherwise, with caution” ? For in these last 
cases only, if evil lies in a perverted will, is caution to 
be used. And if things inevitable and uncontrollable 
are nothing to us, in these we are to make use of 
courage. Thus we shall be at once cautious and 
courageous ; and, indeed, courageous on account of 
this very caution ; for by using caution, with regard 


94 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


to things really evil, we shall gain courage, with 
regard to what are not so. 

But we are in the same condition with deer ; when 
these in a fright fly from the plumes [which hunters 
wave], whither do they turn, and to what do they 
retire for safety? To the nets. And thus they are 
undone, by inverting the objects of fear and confi- 
dence. Thus we, too. When do we yield to fear? 
About things inevitable. When, on the other hand, 
do we behave with courage, as if there were noth- 
ing to be dreaded? About things that might be con- 
trolled by will. To be deceived then, or to act rashly 
or imprudently, or to indulge a scandalous desire, 
we treat as of no importance, in our effort to bring 
about things which we cannot, after all, control. But 
where death, or exile, or pain, or ignominy, is con- 
cerned, then comes the retreat, the flutter, and the 
fright. Hence, as it must be with those who err in 
matters of the greatest importance, we turn what 
should be courage into rashness, desperation, reck- 
lessness, effrontery ; and what should be caution be- 
comes timid, base, and full of fears and perturbations. 
Let one apply his spirit of caution to things within the 
reach of his own will, then he will have the subject of 
avoidance within his own control ; but if he transfers 
it to that which is inevitable, trying to shun that which 
he cannot control and others can, then he must needs 
fear, be harassed and be disturbed. For it is not death 
or pain that is to be dreaded, but the fear of pain or 
death. Hence we commend him who says: 

“ Death is no ill, but shamefully to die.” * 


Courage, then, ought to be opposed to death, and 
caution to the fear of death ; whereas we, on the con- 


* Euripides, Fragments. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 95 


trary, oppose to death, flight; and to these our false 
convictions concerning it, recklessness, and despera- 
tion, and assumed indifference. 

Socrates used, very properly, to call these things 
masks ; for, as masks appear shocking and formidable 
to children, from their inexperience ; so we are thus 
affected with regard to things, for no other reason. 
For what constitutes a child? Ignorance. What 
constitutes a child? Want of instruction ; for they 
are our equals, so for as their degree of knowledge 
permits. What is death? A mask. Turn it on the 
other side and be convinced. See, it doth not bite. 
This little body and spirit must be again, as once, sep- 
arated, either now or hereafter; why, then, are you 
displeased if it be now? For if not now it will be 
hereafter. Why? To fulfil the course of the uni- 
verse ; for that hath need of some things present, 
others to come, and others already completed. 

What is pain? A mask. Turn it and be con- 
vinced. 

This weak flesh is sometimes affected by harsh, 
sometimes by smooth impressions. If suffering be 
beyond endurance, the door is open ; till then, bear it. 
It is fit that the final door should be open against all 
accidents, since thus we escape all trouble. 

What, then, is the fruit of these principles? What 
it ought to be; the most noble, and the most suitable 
to the wise, tranquillity, security, freedom. For 
in this case, we are not to give credit to the many, 
who say, that none ought to be educated but the free ; 
but rather to the philosophers, who say, that the wise 
alone are free. 

“ How so?” 

Thus: is freedom anything else than the power of 
living as we like ? 


96 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


“ Nothing else.” 

Well; tell me then, do you like to live in error? 

“We do not. No one, who lives in error, is free.” 

Do you like to live in fear? Do you like to live in 
sorrow ? Do you like to live in perturbation ? 

* By no means.” 

No one, therefore, in a state of fear, or sorrow, or 
perturbation, is free ; but whoever is delivered from 
sorrow, fear, and perturbation, by the same means is 
delivercd likewise from slavery. How shall we he- 
lieve you, then, good legislators, when you say, “‘ We 
allow none to be educated but the free”? For the 
philosophers say, “‘ We allow none to be free but the 
wise”; that is, God doth not allow it. 

“ What, then, when any person hath turned his 
slave about, before the consul,* has he done nothing ? ” 

Yes, he has. 

“ What?” 

He has turned his slave about, before the consul. 

“ Nothing more?” 

Yes. He pays a fine for him. 

“Well, then; is not the man, who has gone 
through this ceremony, .rendered free?” 

Only so far as he is emancipated from perturbation. 
Pray, have you, who are able to give this freedom to 
others, no master of your own? Are you uota slave 
to money? Toa girl? To a boy? To a tyrant? 
To some friend of a tyrant? Else, why do you trem- 
ble when any one of these is in question? Therefore, 
I so often repeat to you, let this be your study and 
constant pursuit, to learn in what it is necessary to be 
courageous, and in what cautious ; courageous against 
the inevitable, cautious so far as your will can control. 


* The prescribed form of manumission. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 97 


“But have I not read my essay to you? Do not 
you know what I am doing?” 

In what? 

“In my essays.” 

Show me in what state you are, as to desires and 
aversions ; whether you do not fail of what you wish, 
and incur what you would avoid; but, as to these 
commonplace essays, if you are wise, you will take 
them, and destroy them. 

“ Why, did not Socrates write?” 

Yes; who so much? But how? As he had not 
always one at hand, to argue against his principles, 
or be argued against in his turn, he argued with and 
examined himself; and always made practical appli- 
cation of some one great principle at least. These 
are the things which a philosopher writes ; but such 
commonplaces as those of which I speak, he leaves 
to the foolish, or to the happy creatures whom idle- 
ness furnishes with leisure; or to such as are too 
weak to regard consequences. And yet will you, 
when opportunity offers, come forward to exhibit and 
read aloud such things, and take a pride in them ? 

“‘ Pray, see how I compose dialogues.” 

Talk not of that, man, but rather be able to say, 
See how I accomplish my purposes; see how I avert 
what I wish to shun. Set death before me; set pain, 
a prison, disgrace, doom, and you will know me. 
This should be the pride of a young man come out 
from the schools. Leave the rest to others. Let no 
one ever hear you waste a word upon them, nor suf 
fer it, if any one commends you for them; but admit 
that you are nobody, and that you know nothing, 
Appear to know only this, never to fail nor fall. Let 
others study cases, problems, and syllogisms. Do 

7 


98 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


you rather contemplate death, change, torture, exile ; 
and all these with courage, and reliance upon Him, 
who hath called you to them, and judged you worthy 
a post in which you may show what reason can do, 
when it encounters the inevitable. And thus, this 
paradox ceases to be a paradox, that we must be at 
once cautious and courageous; courageous against 
the inevitable ; and cautious, when events are within 
our own control. 


CHAPTER II. 
OF TRANQUILLITY. 


(\ONSIDER, you who are going to take your trial, 

what you wish to preserve, and in what to suc- 
ceed. For if you wish to preserve a will in harmony 
with nature, you are entirely safe; everything goes 
well; you have no trouble on your hands. While 
you wish to preserve that freedom which belongs to 
you, and are contented with that, for what have you 
longer to be anxious? For who is the master of 
things like these? Who can take them away? If 
you wish to be a man of modesty and fidelity, who 
shall prevent you? If you wish not to be restrained 
or compelled, who shall compel you to desires con- 
trary to your principles; to aversions, contrary to 
your opinion? The judge, perhaps, will pass a sen- 
tence against you, which he thinks formidable; but 
can he likewise make you receive it with shrink- 
ing? Since, then, desire and aversion are in your 
own power, for what have you to be anxious? Let 
this be your introduction ; this your narration; this 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 99 


your proof; this your conclusion; this your victory ; 
and this your applause. Thus said Socrates to one 
who put him in mind to prepare himself for his trial : 
“Do you not think that I have been preparing my- 
self for this very thing, my whole life long ?”” — By 
what kind of preparation ?— “I have attended to my 
own work.” — What mean you?—“TI have done 
nothing unjust, either in public, or in private life.” 

But if you wish to make use of externals too, your 
body, your estate, your dignity ; I advise you imme- 
diately to prepare yourself by every possible prepara- 
tion ; and besides, to consider the disposition of your 
judge, and of your adversary. If it be necessary to 
embrace his knees, do so; if to weep, weep; if to 
groan, groan. For when you have once made your- 
self a slave to externals, be a slave wholly ; do not 
struggle, and be alternately willing and unwilling, 
but be simply and thoroughly the one or the other ; 
free, or a slave ; instructed, or ignorant ; a game-cock, 
or a craven; either bear to be beaten till you die, or 
give out at once; and do not be soundly beaten first, 
and then give out at last. 

If both alternatives be shameful, learn immediately 
to distinguish where good and evil lie. They lie 
where truth likewise lies. Where truth and nature 
dictate, there exercise caution or courage. Why, do 
you think that, if Socrates had concerned himself 
about externals, he would have said, when he ap- 
peared at his trial, “ Anytus and Melitus may indeed 
kill, but hurt me they cannot”? Was he so foolish 
as not to see that this way did not lead to safety, but 
the contrary? What, then, is the reason, that he not 
only disregarded, but defied, his judges? Thus my 
friend Heraclitus, in a trifling suit, about a little es- 


100 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


tate at Rhodes, after having proved to the judges that 
his cause was good, when he came to the conclusion 
of his speech, “I will not entreat you,” said he; 
“nor be anxious as to what judgment you give; for 
it is rather you who are to be judged, than I.” And 
thus he lost his suit. What need was there of this ? 
Be content not to entreat; yet do not proclaim that 
you will not entreat; unless it be a proper time to 
provoke the judges designedly, as in the case of So- 
crates. But if you too are preparing such a speech 
as his, what do you wait for? Why do you consent 
to be tried? For if you wish to be hanged, have pa- 
tience, and the gibbet will come. But if you choose 
rather to consent, and make your defence as well as 
you can, all the rest is to be ordered accordingly ; 
with a due regard, however, to the preservation of 
your own proper character. 

For this reason it is absurd to call upon me for 
specific advice. How should I know what to advise 
you? Ask me rather to teach you to accommodate 
yourself to whatever may be the event. The former 
is just as if an illiterate person should say, “Tell me 
how to write down some name that is proposed to 
me”; and I show him how to write the name of 
Dion ; and then another comes, and asks him to write 
the name, not of Dion, but of Theon ;-— what will be 
the consequence ? What will he write? Whereas, if 
you make writing your study, you are ready prepared 
for whatever word may occur ; if not, how can I ad- 
vise you? For, if the actual case should suggest 
something else, what will you say, or how will you 
say, or how will you act? Remember, then, the gen- 
eral rule, and you will need no special suggestions ; 
but if you are absorbed in externals, you must neces- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 101 


sarily be tossed up and down, according to the incli- 
nation of your master. 

Who is your master? He who Sgntrols those 
things which you seek or shun. 


CHAPTER III. 


CONCERNING SUCH AS RECOMMEND PERSONS TO THE 
PHILOSOPHERS 


IOGENES rightly answered one who desired let- 

ters of recommendation from him: “ At first 
sight he will know you to be a man; and whether 
you are a good or a bad man, if he has any skill in 
distinguishing, he will know likewise; and, if he has 
not, he will never know it, though I should write a 
thousand times.” . Just as if you were a piece of coin, 
and should desire to be recommended to any person 
as good, in order to be tried ;—if it be to an assayer, 
he will know your value, for you will recommend 
yourself. 

We ought, therefore, in life also, to have some- 
thing analogous to this skill in gold; that one may 
be able to say, like the assayer, Bring me whatever 
piece you will, and I will find out its value; or, as I 
would say with regard to syllogisms, Bring me whom- 
soever you will, and I will distinguish for you, wheth- 
er he knows how to solve syllogisms, or not. Why ? 
Because I can do that myself, and have that faculty 
which is necessary for one, who can discern persons 
skilled in such solutions. But how do I act in life? 
I sometimes call a thing good ; at other -times, bad. 
What is the cause of this? Something contrary to 


102 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


what occurs to me in syllogisms, — ignorance, and 
inexperience. 


CHAPTER IV. 


CONCERNING A MAN WHO HAD BEEN GUILTY OF ADUL- 
TERY. 


JUST as he was once saying, that man is made for 

fidelity, and that whoever subverts this, subverts 
the peculiar property of man; there entered one of 
the so-called literary men, who had been found guilty 
of adultery, in that city. — But, continued Epictetus, 
if, laying aside that fidelity for which we were born, 
we form designs against the wife of our neighbor, 
what do we? What else but destroy and ruin — 
what? Fidelity, honor, and sanctity of manners. 
Only these? And do not we ruin neighborhood ? 
Friendship? Our country?’ In what rank do we 
then place ourselves? How am I to consider you, 
sir? Asaneighbor? A friend? What sort of one? 
As a citizen? How shall I trust you? Indeed, if 
you were some potsherd, so noisome that no use 
could be made of you, you might be thrown on a 
dunghill, and no mortal would take the trouble to 
pick you up; but if, being a man, you cannot fill any 
one place in human society, what shall we do with 
you? For, suppose you cannot hold the place of a 
friend, can you hold even that of a Slave ? And who 
will trust you? Why, then, should not you also be 
contented to be thrown upon some dunghill, as a use- 
less vessel, and indeed as worse than that? Will 
you say, after this, Has no one any regard for me, a 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 103 


man of letters? Why, you are wicked, and fit for no 
use. Just as if wasps should take it ill that no one 
has any regard for them; but all shun, and whoever 
can, beats them down. You have such a sting, that 
whoever you strike with it, is thrown into troubles 
and sorrows. What would you have us do with you? 
There is nowhere to place you. 

‘“‘ What, then, are not women made by nature com- 
mon?” 

I admit it; and so is food at table common to those 
who are invited. But, after it is distributed, will you 
go and snatch away the share of him who sits next 
you; or slyly steal it, or stretch out your hand, and 
taste ; and, if you cannot tear away any of the meat, 
dip your fingers and lick them? A fine companion! 
A Socratic guest indeed! Again; is not the theatre 
common to all the citizens? Therefore come, when 
all are seated, if you dare, and turn any one of them 
out of his place. In this sense, only, are women 
common by nature; but when the laws, like a good 
host, have distributed them, cannot you, like the rest 
of the company, be contented with your own share, 
but must you pilfer, and taste what belongs to an- 
other ? 

“But I am a man of letters, and understand 
Archedemus.” 

With all your understanding of Archedemus, then, 
you will be an adulterer, and a rogue; and instead 
of a man, a wolf or an ape. For where is the differ- 
ence ? 


104 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER V. 


HOW NOBLENESS OF MIND MAY BE CONSISTENT WITH 
PRUDENCE. 


HE materials of action are variable, but the use 
we make of them should be constant. 

How, then, shall one combine composure and tran- 
quillity with energy ; doing nothing rashly, nothing 
earelessly ? 

By imitating those who play at games. The dice. 
are variable; the pieces are variable. How do I 
know what will fall ont? But it is my business, to 
manage carefully and dexterously whatever happens. 
Thus in life too, this is the chief business, to consider 
and discriminate things; and say, “ Externals are not 
in my power; choice is. Where shall I seek good 
and evil? Within; in what is my own.” But in 
what is controlled by others, count nothing good or 
evil, profitable or hurtful, or any such thing. 

What, then, are we to treat these in a careless way ? 

By no means; for this, on the other hand, would 
be a perversion of the will, and so contrary to nature. 
But we are to act with care, because the use of our 
materials is not indifferent; and at the same time 
with calmness and tranquillity, because the materials 
themselves are uncertain. For where a thing is not 
uncertain, there no one can restrain or compel me. 
Where I am capable of being restrained or compelled, 
the acquisition does not depend upon me; nor is it 
either good or evil. The use of it, indeed, is either 
good or evil; but that does depend upon me. It is 
difficult, I own, to blend and unite tranquillity in 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 105 - 


accepting, and energy in using, the facts of life; but 
it is not impossible ; if it be, it is impossible to be 
happy. How do we act in a voyage? What is in 
my power? To choose the pilot, the sailors, the day, 
the hour. Afterwards comes a storm. What have 
I to care for? My part is performed. This matter 
belongs to another, to the pilot. But the ship is 
sinking ; what then have I to do? That which alone 
I can do; I submit to being drowned, without fear, 
without clamor, or accusing God; but as one who 
knows, that what is born, must likewise die. For 
I am not eternity, but a man; a part of the whole, 
as an hour is of the day. I must come like an hour, 
and like an hour must pass away. What signifies it 
whether by drowning, or by a fever? For, in some 
way or other, pass I must. 

This you may see to be the practice of those wha 
play skilfully at ball. No one contends for the ball 
itself, as either a good or an evil; but how he may 
throw and catch it again. Here lies the address, here 
the art, the nimbleness, the skill; lest I fail to catch 
it, even when I open my breast for it, while another 
catches it, whenever I throw it. But if we catch or 
throw it, in fear and trembling, what kind of play 
will this be? How shall we keep ourselves steady ; 
or how see the order of the game? One will say, 
throw: another, do not throw: a third, you have 
thrown once already. This is a mere quarrel; nota 
play. Therefore Socrates well understood playing 
at ball. 

* What do you mean?” 

When he joked at his trial. ‘Tell me,” said he, 
“¢ Anytus, how can you say that I do not believe in 
a God? What do you think demons are? Are they 


106 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


not either the offspring of the gods, or compounded 
of gods and men?” — Yes. — “Do you think, then, 
that one can believe there are mules, and not believe 
that there are asses?” This was just as if he had 
been playing at ball. And what was the ball he had 
to play with? Life, chains, exile, a draught of poi- 
son, separation from a wife, and leaving his children 
orphans. These were what he had to play with; and 
yet be did play, and threw the ball with address. 
Thus we should be careful as to the play, but indiff 
erent as to the ball. We are by all means to manage 
our materials with art; not taking them for the best ; 
but showing our art about them, whatever they may 
happen to be. Thus a weaver does not make the 
wool, but employs his art upon what is given him. 
It is another who gives you food, and property; and 
may take them away, and your paltry body too. Do 
you, however, work upon the materials you have re- 
ceived ; and then, if you come off unhurt, others, no 
doubt, who meet you, will congratulate you on your 
escape. But he who has a clearer insight into such 
things, will praise and congratulate you if he sees 
you to have done well; but if you owe your escape 
to any unbecoming action, he will do the contrary. 
For where there is a reasonable cause for rejoicing, 
there is cause likewise for congratulation. 

How, then, are some external circumstances said 
to be according to nature ; others contrary to it? 

Only when we are viewed as isolated individuals. 
T will allow that it is natural for the foot, (for in- 
stance,) to be clean. But if you take it as a foot, 
and not as a mere isolated thing, it will be fit that it 
should walk in the dirt, and tread upon thorns; and 
sometimes that it should even be cut off, for the good 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. . 107 


of the whole ; otherwise it is no longer a foot. We 
should reason in some such manner concerning our- 
selves. Whoare you? Aman. If then, indeed, you 
consider yourself isolatedly, it is natural that you 
should live to old age, should be prosperous and 
healthy ; but if you consider yourself as a man, and 
as a part of the whole, it will be fit, in view of that 
whole, that you should at one time be sick; at an- 
other, take a voyage, and be exposed to danger ; 
sometimes be in want; and possibly die before your 
time. Why, then, are you displeased? Do not you 
know, that otherwise, just as the other ceases to be a 
foot, so you are no longer a man? For what is a 
man? A part of a commonwealth; first and chiefly 
of that which includes both gods and men ; and next, 
of that to which you immediately belong, which is a 
mniniature of the universal city. 

What, then, must I, at one time, go before a tribu- 
nal; must another, at another time, be scorched by a 
fever ; another be exposed to the sea; another die; 
another be condemned ? 

Yes ; for it is impossible, in such a body, in such a 
world, and among such companions, but that some 
one or other of us must meet with such circum- 
stances. Your business, then, is simply to say what 
you ought, to order things as the case requires. 
After this comes some one and says, “I pronounce 
that you have acted unjustly.” Much good may it 
do you; I have done my part. You are to look to 
it, whether you have done yours; for you may as 
well understand that there is some danger in that 
quarter also. 


108 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER VI. 
OF CIRCUMSTANCES.* 


PROCESS of reasoning may be an indifferent 

thing ; but our judgment concerning it is not 
indifferent ; for it is either knowledge, or opinion, or 
mistake. So the events of life occur indifferently, but 
the use of it is not indifferent. When you are told, 
therefore, that these things are indifferent, do not, on 
that account, ever be careless ; nor yet, when you are 
governed by prudence, be abject, and dazzled by ex- 
ternals. It is good to know your own qualifications 
and powers; that, where you are not qualified, you 
may be quiet, and not angry that others have there 
the advantage of you. For you too will think it 
reasonable, that you should have the advantage in 
the art of reasoning ; and, if others should be angry 
at it, you will tell them, by way of consolation, “ This 
I have learned, and you have not.” Thus too, wher- 
ever practice is necessary, do not pretend to what can 
only be attained by practice ; but leave the matter to 
those who are practised, and do you be contented in 
your own serenity. 

“ Go, for instance, and pay your court to such a 
person.” — How? I will not do it abjectly. So I 
find myself shut out; for I have not learned to get in 
at the window, and finding the door shut, I must ne- 
cessarily either go back, or get in at the window. — 
“But speak to him at least.” J am willing. “In 


* This discourse is supposed to have been addressed to a pupil, 
who feared to remain at Rome, because of the persecutions aimed by 
Domitian at the philosophers. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 109 


what manner?” Not basely at any rate. “Well, 
you have failed.” This is not your business, but his. 
Why do you claim what belongs to another? Al- 
ways remember what is your own, and what is an- 
other’s, and you will never be disturbed. 

Hence Chrysippus rightly says: While consequences 
are uncertain, I will keep to those things which will 
bring me most in harmony with nature; for God him- 
self hath formed me to choose this. If I knew, that it 
was inevitable for me to be sick, I would conform my 
inclinations that way ; for even the foot, if it had un- 
derstanding, would be inclined to get into the dirt. 
For why are ears of corn produced, if it be not to 
ripen ? and why do they ripen, if not to be reaped? 
For they are not isolated, individual things. If they 
were capable of sense, do you think they would wish 
never to be reaped? It would be a curse upon ears of 
corn not to be reaped, and we ought to know that it 
would be a curse upon man not to die; like that of 
not ripening, and not being reaped. Since, then, it 
is necessary for us to be reaped, and we have, at the 
same time, understanding to know it, are we angry at 
it? This is only because we neither know what we 
are, nor have we studied. what belongs to man, as 
jockies do what belongs to horses. Yet Chrysantas, 
when he was about to strike an enemy, on hearing the 
trumpet sound a retreat, drew back his hand; for he 
thought it more eligible to obey the command of his 
general, than his own inclination.* But not one of 
us, even when necessity calls, is ready and willing to 


* In a speech which Cyrus made to his soldiers, after the battle 
with the Assyrians, he mentioned Chrysantas, one of his captains, 
with particular honor, for this instance of obedience. Xenoph. Cy- 
rop. IV. 1.—C. 


110 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


obey it; but we weep and groan over painful events, 
calling them our “circumstances.” What circum- 
stances, man? For if you call what surrounds you 
circumstances, everything is a circumstance; but, if 
by this you mean hardships, where is the hardship, 
that whatever is born must die? The instrument is 
either a sword, or a wheel, or the sea, or a tile, or a 
tyrant. And what does it signify to you by what way 
you descend to Hades? All are equal; but, if you 
would hear the truth, the shortest is that by which a 
tyrant sends you. No tyrant was ever six months in 
cuting any man’s throat; but a fever often takes a 
year. All these things are mere sound, and the ru- 
mor of empty names. ; 

“My life is in danger from Cesar.” 

And am I not in danger, who dwell at Nicopolis, 
where there are so many earthquakes? And when 
you yourself recross the Adriatic, what is then in 
danger? Is it not your life? 

“ Ay, and my convictions also.” 

What, your own? Howso? Can any one compel 
you to have any convictions contrary to your own 
inclination ? 

‘“ But the convictions of others too.” 

And what danger is it of yours, if others have false 
convictions ? 

“But I am in danger of being banished.” 

What is it to be banished? only to be somewhere 
else than at Rome. 

“Yes? but what if I should be sent to Gyaros?” 

If it be thought best for you, you will go; if not, 
there is another place than Gyaros whither you are 
sure to go, — where he who now sends you to Gyaros 
must go likewise, whether he will or not. Why, then, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 111 


do you come to these, as to great trials? They are 
not equal to your powers. So that an ingenuous 
young man would say, it was not worth while for this, 
to have read and written so much, and to have sat so 
long listening to this old man. Only remember the 
distinction between what is'your own, and what is not 
your own, and you will never claim what belongs to 
others. Judicial bench or dungeon, each is but a 
place, one high, the other low; but your will is 
equal to either condition, and if you have a mind to 
keep it so, it may beso kept. We shall then become 
imitators of Socrates, when, even in a prison, we are 
able to write hymns of praise ;* but as we now are, 
consider whether we could even bear to have another 
say to us in prison, “Shall I read you a hymn of 
praise ?’?—-“ Why do you trouble me; do you not 
know my sad situation? In such circumstances, am 
I able to hear hymns ?”’ — What circumstances ? — 
“T am going to die.” —And are all other men to be 
immortal ? 


CHAPTER VII. 
OF DIVINATION. 


ROM an’ unseasonable regard to divination, we 
omit many duties : for what can the diviner con- 
template besides death, danger, sickness, and such 
matters. When it is necessary, then, to expose one’s 
self to danger for a friend, or even a duty to die for 
him, what occasion have I for divination? Have not 
I a diviner within, who has told me the essence of . 


* Diogenes Laertius in his life of Socrates (c. 42) gives the first 
verse of a hymn thus composed by him. — H. 


112 . HE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


good and evil; and who explains to me the indications 
of both? What further need, then; have I of signs or 
auguries. Can I tolerate the other diviner, when he 
says, “ This is for your interest”? ? For does he know 
what is for my interest? Does he know what good 
is? Has he learned the indications of good and evil, 
as he has those of the victims? If so, he knows the 
indications likewise of fair and base, just and unjust. 
You may predict to me, sir, what is to befall me; life 
or death, riches or poverty. But whether these things 
are for my interest, or not, I shall not inquire of you. 
“Why?” Because you cannot even give an opinion 
about points of grammar; and do you give it here, 
in things about which all men differ and dispute? 
Therefore the lady, who was going to send a month’s 
provision to Gratilla,* in her banishment, made a 
right answer to one, who told her that Domitian 
would seize it. ‘I had rather,” said she, “ that he 
should seize it, than I not send it.” 

What, then, is it, that leads us so often to divina- 
tion? Cowardice; the dread of events. Hence we 
flatter the diviners. “Pray, sir, shall I inherit my 
father’s estate? ’’ — “ Let us see: let us sacrifice upon 
the occasion.”’ — “ Nay, sir, just as fortune pleases.” 
Then if he predicts that we shall inherit it, we give 
him thanks, as if we received the inheritance from 
him. The consequence of this is, that they impose 
upon us. 

What, then, is to be done ? 

We should come without previous desire or aver- 
sion ; as a traveller inquires the road of the person 
he meets, without any desire for that which turns to 


* A lady of high rank at Rome, banished from Italy, among 
many noble persons, by Domitian. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 113 


the right hand, more than for that to the left; for he 
wishes for neither of these, but only for that road which: 
leads him properly. Thus we should come to God, 
as to a guide. Just as we make use of our eyes; 
not persuading them to show us one object rather 
than another, but receiving such as they present to 
us. But now we conduct the augury with fear and 
trembling ; and in our invocations to God, entreat. 
him: “ Lord have mercy upon me, suffer me to come 
off safe.” Foolish man! would you have anything 
then but what is best? And what is best but what 
pleases God? Why would you then, so far as in you 
lies, corrupt your judge and seduce your adviser ? 


CHAPTER VIII 
WHEREIN CONSISTS THE ESSENCE OF GOOD. 


OD is beneficial. Good is also beneficial. It 

should seem, then, that where the essence of 
God is, there too is the essence of good. What then 
is the essence of God? Flesh? Byno means. An es- 
tate? Fame? By no means. Intelligence? Knowl- 
edge? Right reason? Certainly. Here, then, with- 
out more ado, seek the essence of good. For do you 
seek that quality in a plant? No. Or ina brute? 
No. If, then, you seek it only in a rational subject, 
why do you seek it anywhere but in what distin- 
guishes that from things irrational? Plants make 
no voluntary use of things; and therefore you do not 
apply the term of good to them. — Good, then, implies 
such use. And nothing else? If so, you may say, 
that good, and happiness, and unhappiness, belong to 

8 


114 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


mere animals. But this you do not say, and, you are 
right; for, how much soever they have the use of 
things, they have not the intelligent use; and with 
good reason ; for they are made to be subservient to 
others, and not of primary importance. Why was 
an ass made? Was it as being of primary impor- 
tance? No; but because we had need of a’ back, able 
to carry burdens. We had need too that he should 
be capable of locomotion ; therefore he had the vol- 
untary use of things added; otherwise he could not 
have moved. But here his endowments end; for, 
if an understanding of that use had been likewise 
added, he would not, in reason, have been subject 
to us, nor have done us these services; but would 
have been like and equal to ourselves. Why will 
you not, therefore, seek the essence of good in that 
without which you cannot say that there is good in 
anything ? 

What then? Are not all these likewise the works 
of the gods? They are; but not primary existences, 
nor parts of the gods. But you are a primary exist- 
ence. You area distinct portion of the essence of 
God ; and contain a certain part of him in yourself. 
Why then are you ignorant of your noble birth? 
Why do not you consider whence you came? why 
do not you remember, when you are eating, who yon 
are who eat; and whom you feed? When you are 
in the company of women; when you are conversing ; 
when you are exercising; when you are disputing; 
do not you know, that it is the Divine you feed; the 
Divine you exercise? You carry a God about with 
you, poor wretch, and know nothing of it. Do you 
suppose I mean some god without you of gold or sil- 
ver? Itis within yourself that you carry him; and 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 115 


you do not observe that you profane him by impure 
thoughts and unclean actions. If the mere external 
image of God were present, you would not dare to act 
as you do; and when God himself is within you, and 
hears and sees all, are not you ashamed to think and 
act thus; insensible of your own nature, and at en- 
mity with God ? 

Why then are we afraid, when we send a young 
man from the school, into active life, that he should 
behave indecently, eat indecently, converse indecently 
with women ; that he should either debase himself by 
slovenliness, or clothe himself too finely? Knows he 
not the God within him? Knows he not in what 
company he goes? Itis provoking to hear him say 
{to his instructor], “I wish to have you with me.” 
Have you not God? Do you seek any other, while 
you have him? Or will He tell you any other things 
than these?. If you were a statue of Phidias, as 
Zeus or Minerva, you would remember both yourself 
and the artist ; and, if you had any sense, you would 
endeavor to bein no way unworthy of him who formed 
you, nor of yourself; nor to appear in an unbecom- 
ing manner to spectators. And are you now careless 
how you appear, when you are the workmanship of 
Zeus himself? And yet, what comparison is there, 
either between the artists, or the things they have 
formed? What work of any artist has conveyed into 
its structure those very faculties which are shown in 
shaping it? Is it anything but marble, or brass, or 
gold, or ivory? And the Minerva of Phidias, when 
its hand is once extended, and a Victory placed in it, 
remains in that attitude forever. But the works of 
God are endowed with motion, breath, the powers of 
use and judgment. Being, then, the work of such an 


116 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


artist, will you dishonor him, — especially, when he 
hath not only formed you, but given your guardian- 
ship to yourself? Will you not only be forgetful of 
this, but, moreover, dishonor the trust? If God had 
committed some orphan to your charge, would you 
have been thus careless of him? He has delivered 
yourself to your care ; and says, “I had no one fitter 
to be trusted than you: preserve this person for me, 
such as he is by nature; modest, faithful, noble, 
unterrified, dispassionate, tranquil.”” And will you 
not preserve him ? 

But it will be said: “ What need of this lofty look, 
and dignity of face?” 
“ J answer, that I have not yet so much dignity as 
the case demands. For Ido not yet trust to what I 
have learned, and accepted. I still fear my own 
weakness. Let me but take courage a little, and 
then you shall see such a look, and such an appear- 
ance, as I ought to have. Then I will show you the 
statue, when it is finished, when it is polished. Do 
you think I will show you a supercilious counte- 
nance? Heaven forbid? For Olympian Zeus doth. 
not haughtily lift his brow; but keeps a steady coun- 
tenance, as becomes him who is about to say, 


« My promise is irrevocable, sure.” * 


Such will I show myself to you; faithful, modest, 
noble, tranquil. 

‘‘ What, and immortal too, and exempt from age 
and sickness ? ’” 

No. But sickening and dying as becomes the 
divine within me. This is in my power; this I can 
do. The other is not in my power, nor can I do it. 


* Tliad, I, 526.— H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 117 


Shall I show you the muscular training of a philos- 
opher ? 

*¢ What muscles are those ? ”’ 

A will undisappointed; evils avoided; powers 
duly exerted ; careful resolutions; unerring decis- 
ions. These you shall see. 


CHAPTER IX. 


THAT SOME PERSONS, FAILING TO FULFIL WHAT THE 
CHARACTER OF A MAN IMPLIES, ASSUME THAT OF A 
PHILOSOPHER. 


T were no slight attainment, could we merely ful- 
fil what the nature of man implies. For what is 
man? A rational and mortal being. Well; from 
what are we distinguished by reason? From wild 
beasts. From what else? From sheep, and the like. 
Take care, then, to do nothing like a wild beast ; 
otherwise you have destroyed the man; you have not 
fulfilled what your nature promises. Take care too, 
to do nothing like cattle ; for thus likewise the man 
is destroyed. 

In what do we act like cattle? 

When we act gluttonously, lewdly, rashly, sordid- 
ly, inconsiderately, into what are we sunk? Into cat- 
tle. What have we destroyed? The rational being. 

When we behave contentiously, injuriously, pas- 
sionately, and violently, into what have we sunk? 
Into wild beasts. 

And further; some of us are wild beasts of a larger 
size ; others, little mischievous vermin ; such as sug- 
gest the proverb, Let me rather be eaten by a lion. 


118 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


By all these means, that is destroyed which the 
nature of man implies. 

For, when is a conjunctive proposition sustained ? 
When it fulfils what its nature implies. So then the 
sustaining of such a proposition consists in this: that 
its several parts remain a series of truths. 

When is a disjunctive proposition sustained ? When 
it fulfils what its nature implies. 

When is a flute, a harp, a horse, or a dog, preserved 
in existence? While each fulfils what its nature im- 
plies. 

Where is the wonder, then, that manhood should 
be preserved or destroyed in the same manner? All 
things are preserved and improved by exercising their 
proper functions; as a carpenter, by building; a 
grammarian, by grammar: but if he permit himself 
to write ungrammatically, his art will necessarily be 
spoiled and destroyed. Thus modest actions preserve 
the modest man, and immodest ones destroy him; 
faithful actions preserve the faithful man, and the 
contrary destroy him. On the other hand, the con- 
trary actions heighten the contrary characters. Thus 
the practice of immodesty develops an immodest 
character ; knavery, a knavish one; slander, a slan- 
derous one; anger, an angry one; and fraud, a cov- 
etous one. 

For this reason, philosophers advise us not to be 
contented with mere learning; but to add meditation 
likewise, and then practice. For we have been long 
accustomed to perverse actions, and have practised 
upon wrong opinions. If, therefore, we do not like- 
wise habituate ourselves to practise upon right opin- 
ions, we shall be nothing more than expositors of the 
abstract doctrines of others. For who among us is 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 119 


not already able to discourse, according to the rules 
of art, upon good and evil? ‘That some things are 
good, some evil, and others indifferent: the good in- 
clude the virtues and all things appertaining ; the 
evil comprise the contrary ; and the indifferent include 
riches, health, reputation ” ; and then, if, while we 
are saying all this, there should happen some more 
than ordinary noise, or one of the by-standers should 
laugh at us, we are disconcerted. Philosopher, what 
is become of what you were saying? Whence did it 
proceed? Merely from your lips? Why then, do you 
confound the remedies which might be useful to 
others? Why do you trifle on the most important 
subjects? It is one thing to hoard up provision in a 
storehouse, and another to eat it. What is eaten 
is assimilated, digested, and becomes nerves, flesh, 
bones, blood, color, breath. Whatever is hoarded is 
ready indeed, whenever you desire to show it; but is 
of no further use to you than in the mere knowledge 
that you have it. 

For what difference does it make whether you dis- 
course on these doctrines, or those of the heterodox ? 
Sit down and comment skilfully on Epicurus, for in- 
stance; perhaps you may comment more profitably 
than himself. Why then do you call yourself a Stoic ? 
Why do you act like a Jew, when you are a Greek? 
Do not you see on what terms each is called a Jew, a 
Syrian, an Egyptian? And when we see any one 
wavering, we are wont to say, This is not a Jew, but 
only acts like one. But, when he assumes the senti- 
ments of one who has been baptized and circumcised, 
then he both really is, and is called,a Jew. Thus we, 
falsifying our profession, may be Jews in name, but are 
in reality something else. We are inconsistent with 


120 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS, 


our own discourse ; we are far from practising what 
we teach, and what we pride ourselves on knowing. 
Thus, while we are unable to fulfil what the charac- 
ter of a man implies, we are ready to assume besides 
so vast a weight as that of a philosopher. As if a 
person, incapable of lifting ten pouuds, should en- 
deavor to heave the same stone with Ajax. 


CHAPTER X. 


HOW WE MAY INFER THE DUTIES OF LIFE FROM ITS 
NOMINAL FUNCTIONS. 


ONSIDER who you are. In the first place, a 
man; that is, one who recégnizes nothing supe- 

rior to the faculty of free will, but all things as 
subject to this; and this itself as not to be enslaved 
or subjected to anything. Consider then, from what 
you are distinguished by reason. You are distin- 
guished from wild beasts: you are distinguished from 
cattle. Besides, you are a citizen of the universe, 
and a part of it; not a subordinate, but a principal 
part. You are capable of comprehending the Divine 
economy ; and of considering the connections of 
things. What then does the character of a citizen 
imply? To hold no private interest ; to deliberate of 
nothing as a separate individual, but rather like the 
hand or the foot, which, if they had reason, and com- 
prehended the constitution of nature, would never 
pursue, or desire, but with a reference to the whole. 
Hence the philosophers rightly say, that, if it were 
possible for a wise and good man to foresee what was 
to happen, he might co-operate in bringing on himself 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 121 


sickness, and death, and mutilation, being sensible 
that these things are appointed in the order of the 
universe ; and that the whole is superior to a part, 
and the city to the citizen. But, since we do not 
foreknow what is to happen, it becomes our duty to 
hold to what is more agreeable to our choice, for this 
too is a part of our birthright. 

Remember next, that perhaps you are a son; and 
what does this character imply? To esteem every- 
thing that is his, as belonging to his father; in every 
instance to obey him; not to revile him to any one; 
not to say or do anything injurious to him; to give 
way and yield in everything; co-operating with him 
to the utmost of his power. 

After this, know likewise that you are a brother 
too; and that to this character it belongs, to make 
concessions ; to be easily persuaded; to use gentle 
language; never to claim, for yourself, any non- 
essential thing ; but cheerfully to give up these, to 
be repaid by a larger share of things essential. For 
consider what it is, imstead of a lettuce, for instance, 
or a chair, to procure for yourself a good temper. 
How great an advantage gained ! 

If, beside this, you are a senator of any city, die: 
mean yourself as a senator; if a youth, as a youth; 
if an old man, as an old man. For each of these 
names, if it comes to be considered, always points 
out the proper duties. But, if you go and revile your 
brother, I tell you that you bave forgotten who you 
are, and what is your name. If you were a smith, 
and made an ill use of the hammer, you would have 
forgotten the smith; and if you have forgotten the 
brother, and are become, instead of a brother, an 
enemy, do you imagine you have made no change of 


122 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


one thing for another, in that case? If, instead of a 
man, a gentle, social creature, you have become a 
wild beast, mischievous, insidious, biting; have you 
lost nothing? Is itonly the loss of money which is 
reckoned damage; and is there no other thing, the 
loss of which damages a man? If you were to part 
with your skill in grammar, or in music, would you 
think the loss of these a damage ; and yet, if you part 
with honor, decency, and gentleness, do you think 
that no matter? Yet the first may be lost by some 
cause external and inevitable; but the last ouly by 
our own fault. There is no shame in not having, or 
in losing the one; but either not to have, or to lose 
the other, is equally shameful, and reproachful, and 
unhappy. What does the debauchee lose? Man- 
hood. What does he lose, who made him such? 
Many things, but manhood also. What does an 
adulterer lose? The modest, the chaste character ; 
the good neighbor. What does an angry person lose ? 
A coward? Each loses his portion. No one is wicked 
without some loss, or damage. Nowif, after all, you 
treat the loss of money as the only damage, all these 
are unhurt and uninjured. Nay, they may be even 
gainers; as, by such practices, their monéy may pos- 
sibly be increased. But consider ; if you refer every- 
thing to money, then a man who loses his nose is 
not hurt. Yes, say you; he is maimed in his body. 
Well, but does he who loses his sense of smell itself 
lose nothing? Is there, then, no faculty of the soul, 
which benefits the possessor, and which it is an injury 
to lose ? 

“ Of what sort do you mean?” 

Have we not a natural sense of honor ? 

“We have.” 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 123 


Does he, who loses this, suffer no damage? Is he 
deprived of nothing? Does he part with nothing 
that belongs to hin? Have we no natural fidelity ? 
No natural affection? No natural disposition to mu- 
tual usefulness, to mutual forbearance? Is he, then, 
who carelessly suffers himself to be damaged in these 
respects, still safe and uninjured ? 

“What, then, shall not I injure him who has in- 
jured me?” 

Consider first what injury is; and remember what 
you have heard from the philosophers. For, if both 
good and evil lie in the will, see whether what you 
say does not amount to this: “Since he has hurt 
himself, by injuring me, shall I not hurt myself by 
injuring him?” Why do we not make to ourselves 
some such representation as this? Are we hurt, 
when any detriment happens to our bodily posses- 
sions ; and are we not at all hurt, when our will is de- 
praved? He who has erred, or injured another, has 
indeed no pain in his head ; nor loses an eye, nor a leg, 
nor an estate ; and we wish for nothing beyond these. 
Whether our will be habitually humble and faithful, 
or shameless and unfaithful, we regard as a thing in- 
different, except only in the discussions of the schools. 
In that case, all the improvement we make reaches 
only to words; and beyond them is absolutely noth- 
ing. 


124 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER XI 


THE BEGINNING OF PHILOSOPHY. 


Se beginning of philosophy, at least to such as 
enter “pon it in a proper way, and by the door, 


is a consciousness of our own weakness and inability 
in necessary things. For we came into the world 
without any natural idea of a right-angled triangle ; 
of a diesis, or a semitone, in music; but we learn 
each of these things by some artistic instruction. 
Hence, they who do not understand them, do not as- 
sume to understand them. But who ever came into 
the world without an innate idea of good and evil; 
fair and base ; becoming and unbecoming ; happiness 
and misery; proper and improper; what ought to be 
done, and what not to be done? Hence we all make 
use of the terms, and endeavor to apply our impres- 
sions to particular cases. ‘‘ Such a one hath acted 
well, not well; right, not right; is unhappy, is hap- 
py; is just, is unjust.” Which of us refrains from 
these terms? Who defers the use of them, till he 
has learnt it; as those do, who are ignorant of lines 
and sounds? The reason of this is, that we come in- 
structed, in some degree, by nature, upon these sub- 
jects ; and from this beginning, we go on to add self- 
conceit. ‘For why,” say you, “should I not know 
what fair or base is? Have I not the idea of it?” 
You have. ‘“DoI not apply this idea to the partic- 
ular instance?” Youdo. “Do I not apply it rightly 
then?” Here lies the whole question; and here 
arises the self-conceit. Beginning from these ac- 
knowledged points, men ‘proceed, by applying them 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 125 


improperly, to reach the very position most question- 
able. For, if they knew how to apply them also, they 
would be all but perfect. 

If you think that you know how to apply your 
general principles to particular cases, tell me on what 
you base this application. 

* Upon its seeming so to me.” 

But it does not seem so to another; and does not 
he too think that he makes a right application ? 

* He does.” 

Is it possible, then, that each of you should rightly 
apply your principles, on the very subjects about 
which your opinions conflict ? 

* Tt is not.” 

Have you anything to show us, then, for this ap- 
plication, beyond the fact of its seeming so to you? 
And does a madman act any otherwise than seems to 
him right? Is this then a sufficient criterion for him 
too? 

“ Tt is not.” 

Come, therefore, to some stronger ground than 
seeming. 

“ What is that?” 

The ,beginning of philosophy is this; the being 
sensible of the disagreement of men with each other ; 
an inquiry into the cause of this disagreement ; and 
a disapprobation, and distrust of what merely seems ; 
a careful examination into what seems, whether it 
seem rightly ; and the discovery of some rule which 
shall serve like a balance, for the determination of 
weights; like a square, for distinguishing straight 
and crooked. This is the beginning of philosophy. 

Is it possible that all things which seem right to all 
persons, are so? Can things contradictory be right ? 


126 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


We say not all things; but all that seem so to ws. 
And why more to you than to the Syrians, or Egyp- 
tians? Than to me, or to any other man? Not at 
all more. 

Therefore what seems to each man, is not sufficient 
+o determine the reality of a thing. For even in 
weights and measures we are not satisfied with the 
bare appearance ; but for everything we find some 
rule. And is there then, in the present case, no rule 
preferable to what seems? Is it possible, that what 
is of the greatest necessity in human life, should be 
left incapable of determination and discovery ? 

There must be some rule. And why do we not 
seek and discover it, and, when we have discovered, 
ever after make use of it, without fail, so as not even 
to move a finger without it. For this, I conceive, is 
what, when found, will cure those of their madness, 
who make use of no other measure, but their own 
perverted way of thinking. Afterwards, beginning 
from certain known and determinate points, we may 
make'use of general principles, properly applied to 
particulars. 

Thus, what is the subject that falls under our in- 
quiry? Pleasure. Bring it to the rule. Throw it 
into the scale. Must good be something in which it 
is fit to confide, and to which we may trust? Yes. 
Is it fit to trust to anything unstable? No. Is pleas- 
ure, then, a stable thing? No. Take it, then, and 
throw it out of the scale, and drive it far distant from 
the place of good things. 

But, if you are not quick-sighted, and one balance 
is insufficient, bring another. Is it fit to be elated 
by good? Yes. Is it fit, then, to be elated by a 
present pleasure? See that you do not say it is; 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 127 


otherwise I shall not think you so much as worthy 
to use a scale. Thus are things judged, and weighed, 
when we have the rules ready. This is the part of 
philosophy, to examine, and fix the rules; and to 
make use of them, when they are known, is the busi- 
ness of a wise and good man. 


CHAPTER XII 
OF DISPUTATION. 


HAT things are to be learned, in order to the 
right use of reason, the philosophers of our 
sect have accurately taught ; but we are altogether 
unpractised in the due application of them. Only 
give to any oue of us whom you will, some illiterate 
person for an antagonist, and he will not find out how 
to treat him. But when he has a little moved the 
man, if he happens to answer at cross purposes, the 
questioner knows not how to deal with him any fur- 
ther, but either reviles or laughs at him, and says: 
“ He is an illiterate fellow; there is no making any- 
thing of him.” Yet a guide, when he perceives his 
charge going out of the way, does not revile and ridi- 
cule, and then leave him; but leads him into the 
right path. Do you also show your antagonist the 
truth, and you will see that he will follow. But till 
you show it, do not ridicule him ; but rather be sen- 
sible of your own incapacity. 

How, then, did Socrates use to act? He obliged 
his antagonist himself to bear testimony to him; and 
wanted no other witness. Hence he might well say : * 

* Plato, Gorgias, § 69, and elsewhere. — H. 


128 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


“T give up all the rest, and. am always satisfied with 
the testimony of my opponent; and I call in no one 
to vote, but my antagonist alone.” For he rendered 
the arguments drawn from natural impressions so 
clear, that every one saw and avoided the contradic- 
tion. — “ Does an envious man rejoice ? ”? —“ By no 
means ; he rather grieves.’’ (This he moves him to 
say, by proposing the contrary.) —‘‘ Well; and do 
you think envy to be a grief caused by evils?’ — 
“And who ever envied evils? ’?—(Therefore he 
makes the other say, that envy is a grief caused by 
things good.) —“ Does any one envy those things 
which are nothing to him ?”? — “No, surely.” Hav- 
ing thus fully drawn out his idea, he then leaves that 
point; not saying, “‘ Define to me what envy is” ; 
and after he has defined it, “ You have defined it 
wrong ; for the definition does not correspond to the 
thing defined.” 

There are phrases repulsive and obscure to the 
illiterate, which yet we cannot dispense with. But 
we have uo capacity at all to move them, by such ar- 
guments as might lead them, in following the meth- 
ods of their own minds, to admit or abandon any po- 
sition. And, from a consciousness of this incapacity, 
those among us, who have any modesty, give the 
matter entirely up; but the greater part, rashly en- 
tering upon these debates, mutually confound and 
are confounded ; and, at last, reviling and reviled, 
walk off. Whereas it was the principal and most 
peculiar characteristic of Socrates, never to be pro- 
voked in a dispute, nor to throw out any reviling or 
injurious expression ; but to bear patiently with those 
who reviled him, and thus put an end to the contro- 
versy. If you would know how great abilities he had 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 129 


in this particular, read Xenophon’s Banquet, and you 
will see how many controversies he ended. Hence, 
even among the poets, this is justly mentioned with 
the highest commendation, 


« Wisely at once the greatest strife to still.” * 


But what then ? This is no very safe affair now, and 
especially at Rome. For he who does it, must not 
do it in a corner ; but go to some rich consular sen- 
ator, for instance, and question him. Pray, sir, can 
you tell me to whom you intrust your horses? ‘Yes, 
certainly.” Is it then, to any one indifferently, though 
he be ignorant of horsemanship? “By no means.” 
To whom do you intrust your gold, or your silver, 
or your clothes? “Not to any one indifferently.” 
And did you ever consider to whom you committed 
the care of your body? ‘Yes, surely.” To one 
skilled in exercise, or medicine, I suppose. “ With- 
out doubt.” Are these things your chief good; or 
are you possessed of something better than all of 
them? “What do you mean?’ Something which 
makes use of these; and deliberates and counsels 
about each of them? “ What then, do you mean the 
soul?” You have guessed rightly ; for indeed I do 
mean that. “Ido really think it a much better pos- 
session than all the rest.”” Can you show us, then, 
in what manner you have taken care of this soul ? 
For it is not probable, that a person of your wisdom 
and approved character in the state, would carelessly 
suffer the most excellent thing that belongs to you to 
be neglected and lost. “No, certainly.” But do you 
take care of it yourself? And is it done by the in- 
structions of another, or by your own ability ? — Here, 

* Hesiod, Theogony, 87.—— H. 
9 


130 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


now, comes the danger, that he may first say, “ Pray, 
good sir, what business is that of yours; what are 
you tome?” Then, if you persist in troubling him, 
he may lift up his hand, and give you a box on the 
ear. I myself was once a great admirer of this 
method of instruction, till I fell into such kind of 
adventures. 


CHAPTER XIII. 
OF ANXIETY. 


HEN I see any one anxious, I say, what does 
this man mean? Unless he wanted some- 
thing or other, not in ‘his own power, how could he 
still be anxious? A musician, for instance, feels no 
anxiety, while he is singing by himself, but when he 
appears upon the stage’ he does; even if his voice be 
ever so good, or he plays ever so well. For what he 
wishes is not only to sing well, but likewise to gain 
applause. But this is not in his own power. In 
short, where his skill lies, there is his courage. 
Bring any ignorant person, and he does not mind 
him. But in the point which he neither under. 
stands, nor has studied, there he is anxious. 

“ What point is that?” 

He does not understand what a multitude is, nor 
what the applause of a multitude. He has learnt, in- 
deed, how to sound bass and treble; but what the 
applause of the many is, and what force it has in 
life, he neither understands, nor has studied. Hence 
he must necessarily tremble, and turn pale. I can- 
not indeed say, that a man is no musician, when I 
see him afraid; but I can say something else, and 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 131 


indeed many things. And, first of all, I call him a- 
stranger, and say, this man does not know in what 
country he is; and though he has lived here so long, 
he is ignorant of the laws and customs of the state, 
and what is permitted, and what not; nor hath he 
ever consulted any legal adviser, who might tell and 
explain to him the laws. But no man writes a will, 
without knowing how it ought to be written, or con- 
sulting some one who knows; nor does he rashly 
sign a bond, or give security. Yet he indulges his 
desires and aversions, exerts his pursuits, intentions, 
and resolutions, without consulting any legal adviser 
about the matter. 

“How do you mean, without a legal adviser?” 

He knows not, when he chooses what is not allowed 
him, and does not choose what is necessary ; and he 
knows not what is his own, and what belongs to oth- 
ers; for if he did know, he would never be hindered, 
would never be restrained, would never be anxious. 

“ How so?” 

Why ? does any one fear things that are not evils ? 

“No.” 

Does any one fear things, that seem evils indeed, 
but which it is in his own power to prevent ? 

** No, surely.” 

If, then, the things independent of our will are 
neither good nor evil; and all things that do depend 
on will, are in our own power, and can neither be 
taken away from us, nor given to us, unless we 
please ; what room is there left for anxiety? But 
we are anxious about this paltry body or estate of 
ours, or about what Cesar thinks; and not at all 
about anything internal. Are we ever anxious not 
to take up a false opinion? No; for this is within 


132 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


our own power. Or not to follow any pursuit con- 
trary to nature? No; nor this. When, therefore, 
you see any one pale with anxiety, just as the phy- 
sician pronounces from the complexion, that such 
a patient is disordered in the spleen, and another in 
the liver; so do you likewise say, this man is disor- 
dered in his desires and aversions; he cannot walk 
steadily ; he isin a fever. For nothing else changes 
the complexion, or causes trembling, or sets the teeth 
chattering. 


«He crouching walks, or squats upon bis heels.” * 


Therefore Zeno,f when he was to meet Antigonus, 
felt no anxiety. For over that which he prized, An- 
tigonus had no power: and those things over which 
he had power, Zeno did not regard. But Antigonus 
felt anxiety when he was to meet Zeno; and with 
reason, for he was desirous to please him; and this 
was external ambition. But Zeno was not solicitous 
to please Antigonus; for no one skilful in any art is 
solicitous to please a persou unskilful. 

“Tam solicitous to please you.” 

For what? Do you know the rules, by which one 
man judges of another? Have you studied to under- 
stand what a good, and what a bad man is; and how 
each becomes such? Why then are not you yourself 
a good man? 

“In what respect am I not?” 


* Homer, Iliad, xiii. 281. — H. 

t Antigonus Gonatas, king of Macedon, had so great an esteem for 
Zeno, that he often took a journey to Atheus to visit him; and en- 
deavored, by magnificent promises, to allure him to his court, hut 
without success. He gave it as a reason for the distinguished regard 
which he paid him, that, though he had made him many, and very 
considerable offers, Zeno never appeared either mean or insolent. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 133 


Because no good man laments, or sighs, or groans; 
no good man turns pale, and trembles, and says, 
“How will such a one receive me; how will he hear 
me?”-—-As he thinks fit, foolish man. Why do 
you trouble yourself about what belongs to others? 
Is it not his fault, if he receives you ill? 

“Yes, surely.” 

And can one person be in fault, and another the 
sufferer ? 

“ No.” 

Why then are you anxious about what belongs to 
others ? 

“Well; but I am anxious how I shall speak to 
him.” 

What then, cannot you speak to him as you will? 

“ But I am afraid I shall be disconcerted.” 

If you were going to write down the name of 
Dion, should you be afraid of being disconcerted ? 

“ By no means.” 

What is the reason? Is it because you have 
learned how to write ? 

“ Yes.” 

And if you were going to read, would it not be ex- 
actly the same ? 

“ Exactly.” 

What is the reason ? 

“Because every art gives a certain assurance and 
confidence, on its own ground. 

Have you not learned, then, how to speak? And 
what else did you study at school ? 

“< Syllogisms, and convertible propositions.” 

For what purpose? Was it not in order to talk 
properly ? And what is that, but to talk seasonably, 
and discreetly, and intelligently, and without flutter 


134 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


‘or hesitation; and by means of all this, with cour- 
age ? 

“Very true.” 

When, therefore, you go into the field, on horse- 
back, are you anxious on being matched against one 
who is on foot? you being practised and he unprac- 
tised ? 

“ Ay, but the person has power to kill me.” 

Then speak the truth, O! unfortunate! and be 
not arrogant, nor take the philosopher upon you, nor 
conceal from youréelf who are your masters; but 
while you are thus to be held by the body, follow the 
strongest. Socrates, indeed, had studied how to 
speak, who talked in such a manner to tyrants and 
judges, and in prison. Diogenes * had studied how 
to speak, who talked in such a manner to Alexander, 
to Philip, to the pirates, to the person who bought 
him. This belonged to those who had studied the 
matter ; who had courage. But do you go where 
you belong and remain there. Retire into some cor- 
ner, and there sit and weave syllogisms, and propose 
them to others. For there is not in you a man who 
can rule the city. 


%* When Diogenes was sailing to Agina, he was taken by pirates, 
and carried to Crete, and there exposed to sale. Being asked what 
he could do, he answered, “ Govern men’’; and pointing to a well- 
dressed Corinthian, who was passing by, «Sell me,” said he, “to 
him; for he wants a master.” The Corinthian, whose name was 
Xeniades, bonght him, and appointed him the tutor to his children; 
and Diogenes perfectly well discharged his trust. —C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 135 


CHAPTER XIV. 
CONCERNING NASO. 


HEN a certain Roman came to him with his 
son, and had heard one lesson, —“ This,” said 
Epictetus, “is the method of teaching”; and ceased. 
When the other desired him to go on, he answered, 
Every art seems tedious, when it is delivered: to a per- 
son ignorant and unskilful in it. The things per- 
formed by the common arts, quickly manifest the use 
for which they were made; and most of them have 
something attractive and agreeable. Thus the trade 
of a shoemaker, as one seeks to learn it, is an unpleas- 
ant thing ; but the shoe is useful, and not unpleasing 
to the eye. The trade of a smith is extremely un- 
attractive to an ignorant observer, but the work shows 
the usefulness of the art. You will see this much 
more strongly in music; for if you stand by, while a 
person is learning, it will appear to you of all sciences 
the most unpleasant; but the effects are agreeable and 
delightful, even to those who do not understand it. 
So here we take it to be the work of one who stud- 
ies philosophy, to bring his will into harmony with 
events; so that none of the things which happen may 
happen against our inclination, nor those which do 
not happen be desired by us. Hence they, who have 
settled this point, have it in their power never to be 
disappointed in what they seek, nor to incur what 
they shun; but to lead their own lives without sor- 
row, fear, or perturbation ; and in society to preserve 
all the natural or acquired relations of son, father, 
brother, citizen, husband, wife, neighbor, fellow-tray-’ 


186 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


eller, ruler, or subject. Something like this is what 
we take to be the work of a philosopher. It remains 
to inquire, how it is to be effected. Now we see that 
a carpenter becomes a carpenter by learning certain 
things; and a pilot, by learning certain things, be- 
comes a pilot. Probably then it is not sufficient, in 
the present case, merely to be willing to be wise and 
good ; but itis moreover necessary that certain things 
should be learned. What these things are, is the ques- 
tion. The philosophers say, that we are first to learn 
that there is a God; and that his providence directs 
the whole; and that it is not merely impossible to 
conceal from him our actions, but even our thoughts 
and emotions. We are next to learn, what the gods 
are; for such as they are found to be, such must he 
seek to be to the utmost of his power, who would 
please and obey them. If the Deity is faithful, he 
too must be faithful: if free, beneficent, and noble, 
he must be free, beneficent, and noble likewise; in 
all his words and actions, behaving as an imitator 
of God. 

“« Whence, then, are we to begin?” 

If you will give me leave, I will tell you. It is 
necessary, in the first place, that you should under- 
stand words. 

“So then! Ido not understand them now?” 

No. You do not. 

“‘ How is it, then, that I use them?” 

Just as the illiterate use the words of the learned ; 
and as brutes use the phenomena of nature. For use 
is one thing, and understanding another. But if-you 
think you understand them, bring whatever words 
you please, and let us see whether we understand 
them or not. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 137 


“Well; but it is a grievous thing for a man to be 
confuted who has grown old; and has perhaps served 
through his three campaigns to a senatorship.” 

I know it very well. For you now come to me, as 
if you wanted nothing. And how can it enter into 
your imagination, that there should be anything in 
which you are deficient? You are rich; and perhaps 
have a wife and children, and a great number of do- 
mestics. Caesar takes notice of you: you have many 
friends at Rome: you render to all their dues: you 
know how to requite a favor, and revenge an in- 
jury. In what are you deficient? Suppose then, I 
should prove to you, that you are deficient in what 
is most necessary and important to happiness ; and 
that hitherto you have taken care of everything, 
rather than your duty; and, to complete all, that 
you understand not what God or man, or good or 
evil, means? That you are ignorant of all the rest, 
perhaps, you may bear to be told; but if I prove to 
you that you are ignorant even of yourself, how will 
you bear with me, and how will you have patience to 
stay and be convinced? Not at all. You will imme- 
diately be offended, and go away. And yet what in- 
jary have I done you; unless a looking-glass injures 
@ person not handsome, when it shows him to him- 
self, such as he is? Or unless a physician can be 
thought to affront his patient, when he says to him: 
“ Do you think, sir, that you are not ill? You have 
a fever. Eat no meat to-day, and drink water.” No. 
body cries out here, ‘“‘ What an intolerable affront! ” 
But, if you say to any one: You exhibit feverishness 
in your desires, and low habits in what you shun; 
your aims are contradictory, your pursuits not con- 
formable to nature, your opinions rash, and mistaken ; 


188 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS.’ 


he presently goes away, and complains that he is 
affronted. 

This is the position we assume. As, in a crowded 
fair, the horses and cattle are brought to be sold, and 
most men come either to buy or sell; but there are a 
few, who come only to look at the fair, and inquire 
how it is carried on, and why in that manner, and 
who appointed it, and for what purpose ; — thus, in 
this fair [of the world] some, like cattle, trouble 
themselves about nothing but fodder. To all of you, 
who busy yourselves about possessions, and farms, and 
domestics, and public posts, these things are nothing 
else but mere fodder. But there are some few men, 
among the crowd, who are fond of looking on, and 
considering: ‘“ What then, after all, is the world? 
Who governs it? Has it no governor? How is it 
possible, when neither a city nor a house can remain, 
ever so short a time, without some one to govern and 
take care of it, that this vast and beautiful system 
should be administered in a fortuitous and disorderly 
manner? Is there then a governor? Of what sort is 
he? And how does he govern ; and what are we, who 
are under him? And for what designed? Have we 
some connection and relation to him, or none?” In 
this manner are the few affected; and apply them- 
selves only to view the fair, and then depart. Well; 
and they are laughed at by the multitude? Why, so 
are the lookers-on, by the buyers and sellers; and, if 
the cattle had any apprehension, they too would laugh 
at such as admired anything but fodder. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 139 


CHAPTER XV. 


CONCERNING THOSE WHO OBSTINATELY PERSIST IN WHAT- 
EVER THEY HAVE DETERMINED. 


OME, when they hear such discourses as these, 

“ That we ought to be steadfast; that the will is 

by nature free and unconstrained ; and that all else is 
liable to restraint, compulsion, slavery, and tyranny,” 
imagine that they must remain immutably fixed to 
everything which they have determined. But it is 
first necessary that the determination should be a 
wise one. I agree, that there should be sinews in the 
body, but such as in a healthy, an athletic body; for 
if you show me that you exhibit the [convulsed] sin- 
ews of a lunatic, and value yourself upon that, I will 
say to you, Seek a physician, man; this is not mus- 
cular vigor, but is really enervation. Such is the 
distemper of mind in those who hear these discourses 
in a wrong manner; like an acquaintance of mine, 
who, for no reason, had determined to starve himself 
to death. JI went the third day, and inquired what 
was the matter. He answered, “I am determined.” 
— Well; but what is your motive? For, if your de- 
termination be right, we will stay, and assist your 
departure ; but, if unreasonable, change it.— ‘“ We 
ought to keep our determinations.” — What do you 
mean, sir? Not all of them; but such as are right. 
Else, if you should fancy that it is night, if this be 
your principle, do not change, but persist, and say, 
“We ought to keep to our determinations.” What 
do you mean, sir? Not to all of them. Why do 
you not begin by first laying the foundation, inquir- 


140 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


ing whether your determination be a sound one, or 
not; and then build your firmness and constancy 
upon it. For, if you lay a rotten and crazy founda- 
tion, you must not build; since the greater and more 
weighty the superstructure, the sooner will it fall. 
Without any reason, you are withdrawing from us, 
out of life, a friend, a companion, a fellow-citizen 
both of the greater and the lesser city; and while 
you are committing murder, and destroying an inno- 
cent person, you say, “‘ We must keep to our deter- 
minations.” Suppose, by any means, it should ever 
come into your head to kill me ; must you keep such 
a determination ? 

With difficulty this person was, however, at last 
convinced ; but there are some at present, whom 
there is no convincing. So that now I think I un- 
derstand, what before I did not, the meaning of that 
common saying, that a fool will neither bend nor 
break. May it never fall to my lot to have a wise, 
that is an untractable fool for my friend. “It is all 
to no purpose; I am determined.” So are madmen 
too; but the more strongly they are determined upon 
absurdities, the more need have they of hellebore. 
Why will you not act like a sick person, and apply 
yourself to a physician? “Sir, I am sick. Give 
me your assistance ; consider what Iam todo. It is 
my part to follow your directions.” So say in the 
present case: “I know not what I ought to do; and 
I am come to learn.” —‘‘No; but talk to me about 
other things ; for upon this I am determined.” What 
other things? What is of greater consequence, than 
to convince you that it is not sufficient to be deter- 
mined, and to persist? This is the vigor of a mad- 
man; not of one in health. “TI will die, if you com- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 141 


pel me to this.” Why so, man; what is the matter ? 
“T am determined.” I have a lucky escape, that it 
is not your determination to kill me. “I will not be 
bribed [from my purpose.”] Why so? “I am de- 
termined.” Be assured, that with that very vigor 
which you now employ to refuse the bribe, you may 
hereafter have as unreasonable a propensity to take it; 
and again to say, ““I am determined.” As, in a dis- 
tempered and rheumatic body, the humor tends some- 
times to one part, sometimes to another; thus it 
is uncertain which way a sickly mind will incline. 
But if to its inclination and bent a spasmodic vigor 
be likewise added, the evil then becomes desperate 
and incurable. 


CHAPTER XVI 


THAT WE DO NOT STUDY TO MAKE USE OF THE ESTAB- 
LISHED PRINCIPLES CONCERNING GOOD AND EVIL. 


HERE lies good? In the will. Where evil ? 

In the will. Where neither good nor evil? 

In things inevitable. What then? Does any one of 
us remember these lessons out of the schools ? Does 
any one of us study how to answer for himself in the 
affairs of life, as in common questions? “Is it day?” 
— “Yes.” —“Is it night, then ?’’— “No.” — “Ts 
the number of stars even ?’’—“I cannot tell.”? — 
When a bribe is offered you, have you learned to 
make the proper answer, that it is nota good? Have 
you exercised yourself in such answers as these ; or 
only in sophistries ? Why do you wonder, then, that 
you improve in points which you have studied; while 


142 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


in those which you have not studied, there you re- 
main the same? When an orator knows that he has 
written well ; that he has committed to memory what 
he has written ; and that he brings an agreeable voice 
with him ; why is he still anxious? Because he is 
not contented with what he has studied. What does 
he want then? To he applauded hy the audience. 
He has studied the power of speaking, then ; but he 
has not studied censure and applause. For when did 
he hear from any one what applause, what censure 
is? What is the nature of each? What kind of ap- 
plause is to be sought, and what kind of censure to 
be shunned? And when did he ever apply himself 
to study what follows from these lessons? Why do 
you wonder then, if, in what he has learned, he ex- 
cels others ; but, where he has not studied, he is the 
same with the rest of the world? Just as a musician 
knows how to play, sings well, and has the proper 
dress of his profession ; yet trembles when he comes 
upon the stage. For the first he understands ; but 
what the multitude is, or what mean the clamor and 
laughter of the multitude, he does not understand. 
Nor does he even know what anxiety itself is; wheth- 
er it he our own affair, or that of others; or whether 
it be possible to suppress it, or not. Hence, if he is 
applauded, he is puffed up, when he makes his exit: 
but if he is laughed at, the inflation is punctured, 
and subsides. 

Thus are we too affected. What do we admire ? 
Externals. For what do we strive? Enxternals. 
And are we then in any doubt why we fear and 
are anxious? What is the consequence, then, when 
we esteem the things that are brought upon us to 
be evils? We cannot but fear; we cannot but be 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 143 


anxious. And then we say, “O Lord God, how 
shall I avoid anxiety!” Have you not hands, fool- 
ish man? Hath not God made them for you ? 
You might as well kneel and pray to be cured of 
your catarrh. Take care of your discase, rather ; 
and do not murmur. Well; and hath he given you 
nothing in the present case? Hath he not given you 
patience? Hath he not given you magnanimity ? 
Hath he not given you fortitude? When you have 
such hands as these, do you still seek for aid from 
another? But we neither study nor regard these 
things. For give me but one, who cares how he does 
anything, who does not regard the success of any- 
thing, but his own manner of acting. Who, when 
he is walking, regards his own action? Who, when 
he is deliberating, prizes the deliberation itself, and 
not the success that is to follow it? If it happens 
to succeed, he is elated ; and cries: “‘ How prudently 
have we deliberated! Did not I tell you, my dear 
friend, that it was impossible, when we considered 
about anything, that it should not happen right?” 
But if it miscarries, the poor wretch is dejected ; 
and knows not what to say about the matter. Who 
among us ever, for such a purpose, consulted a 
diviner? Who of us ever slept in a temple, to be 
instructed [in a dream] concerning his manner of 
acting? I say, who? Show me one who is truly 
noble and ingenuous, that I may see what I have long 
sought. .Show me either a young or an old man. 
Why then are we still surprised, if, when we waste 
all our attention on the mere materials of action, we 
are, in the manner of action itself, low, sordid, un- 
worthy, timid, wretched, and altogether failures? 
For we do not care about these things, nor make 


144 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


them our study. If we had feared, not death or ex- 
ile, but fear itself, we should have studied not to fall 
into what appears to us to be evil. But, as the case 
now stands, we are eager and loquacious in the 
schools; and, when any little question arises about 
any of these things, we are prepared to trace its con 
sequences; but drag us into practice, and you will 
find us miserably shipwrecked. Let something of 
alarming aspect attack us, and you will perceive 
what we have been studying, and in what we are 
exercised. Besides, through this negligence, we al- 
ways exaggerate, and represent things greater than 
the reality. In a voyage, for instance, casting my 
eyes down upon the ocean below, and looking round 
me, and seeing no land, I am beside myself, and im- 
agine that, if I should be shipwrecked, I must swal- 
low all that ocean ; nor does it occur to me, that 
three pints are enough for me. What is it then, 
that alarms me? The-ocean? No; but my own 
impressions. Again; in an earthquake, I imagine 
the city is going to fall upon me; but is not one lit- 
tle stone enough to knock my brains out? What is 
it then, that oppresses, and makes us beside our- 
selves? Why, what else but our own impressions? 
For what is it, but mere impressions, that distress 
him, who leaves his country, and is separated from 
his acquaintance, and friends, and place, and usual 
manner of life? When children cry, if their nurse 
happens to be absent for a little while, give them a 
cake, and they forget their grief. Shall we compare 
you to these children then? 

“No, indeed. For I do not desire to be pacified by a 
‘eake ; but by right impressions. And what are they?” 

Such as a man ought to study all day long, so as 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 145. 


not to be absorbed in what does not belong to him; 
neither friend, place, nor academy, nor even his own 
body ; but to remember the law, and to have that 
constantly before his eyes. And what is the divine 
law? To preserve inviolate what is properly our 
own; not to claim what belongs to others; to use 
what is given us, and not desire what is not given 
us; and, when anything is taken away, to restore it 
readily, and to be thankful for the time you have 
been permitted the use of it; and not cry after it, 
like a child for its nurse and its mamma. For what 
does it signify, what gets the better of you, or on 
what you depend? Which is the worthier, one cry- 
ing for a doll, or for an academy? You lament. 
for the portico and the assembly of young people, 
and such entertainments. Another comes lament- 
ing that he must no longer drink the water of 
Dircé.* Why, is not the Marcian water as good? 
“But I was used to that.”’ And in time you will be. 
used to the other. And, when you are attached to 
this too, you may weep again, and set yourself, in 
imitation of Euripides, to celebrate, in verse, 


The haths of Nero, and the Marcian water. 


Hence see the origin of Tragedy, when. trifling ac- 
cidents befall foolish men. ‘Ah, when. shall I see 
Athens and the citadel again?” Foolish man, are 
not you contented with what you see every day? 
Can you see anything better than the sun, the moon, 
the stars, the whole earth, the sea? But if, besides, 
you comprehend him who administers the whole, 
and carry him about within yourself, do you still 


* A beautiful clear river in Bootia, flowing into the Ismenus. 
The Marcian water was conveyed by Ancus Marcius to Rome.— C, 
10 


146 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


long after certain stones, and a fine rock? What 
will you do then, when you are to leave even the 
sun and moon? Will you sit crying. like an infant? 
What, then, have you been doing in the school? 
What did you hear? What did you lean? Why 
have you written yourself down a philosopher, in- 
stead of writing the real fact? “I have prepared 
some abstracts, and read over Chrysippus; but I 
have not so much as approached the door of philoso- 
phy. For what pretensions have I in common with 
Socrates, who died and who lived in such a manner ? 
Or with Diogenes? Do you observe either of these 
crying, or out of humor, that he is not to see such 
a mau, or such a woman; nor to live any longer at 
Athens, nor at Corinth; but at Susa, for instance, or 
Ecbatana? For does he stay and repine, who may 
at any time, if he will, quit the entertainment, and 
play no longer? Why does he not stay, as chil- 
dren do, so long ds he is amused? Such a one, no 
doubt, will bear perpetual banishment and a sentence 
of death wonderfully well! Why will not you be 
weaned, as children are; and take more solid food? 
Will you never cease to cry after your mammas and 
nurses, whom the old women about you have taught 
you to bewail? “But if I go away, I shall trouble 
them also.” You trouble them! No; it will not be 
you; but that which troubles you too, — a mere im- 
pression. What have you to do then? Rid your- 
self of that impression; and, if they are wise, they 
will do the same for theirs; or, if not, they must 
lament for themselves. 

Boldly make a desperate push, man, as the saying 
is, for prosperity, for freedom, for magnanimity. Lift 
up your head at last, as being free from slavery. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 147 


Dare to look up to God, and say, ‘“‘ Make use of me 
for the future as Thou wilt. I am of the same mind ; 
Iam one with Thee. I refuse nothing which seems 
good to Thee. Lead me whither Thou wilt. Clothe 
me in whatever dress Thou wilt. Is it Thy will that 
I should be in a public or a private condition ; dwell 
here, or be banished; be poor, or rich? Under ail 
these circumstances I will testify unto Thee before 
men. I will explain the nature of every dispensa- 
tion.”” No? Rather sit alone, then, in safety, and 
wait till your mamma comes to feed you. If Hercules 
had sat loitering at home, what would he have been ? 
Eurystheus, and not Hercules. Besides, by travelling 
through the world, how many acquaintances and how 
many fricuds he made. But none more his friend 
than God; for which reason he was belicved to be 
the son of God; and wasso. In obedience to him, 
he went about extirpating injustice and lawless force. 
But you are not Hercules, nor able to extirpate the 
evils of others; nor even Theseus, to extirpate the 
evils of Attica. LExtirpate your own then. Expel, 
instead of Procrustes and Sciron,* grief, fear, desire, 
envy, malevolence, avarice, effeminacy, intemperance. 
But these can be no otherwise expelled than by look- 
ing up to God alone, as your pattern; by attaching 
yourself to him alone, and being consecrated to his 
commands. If you wish for anything else, you will, 
with sighs and groans, follow what is stronger than 
you; always seeking prosperity without, and never 
able to find it. For you seek it where it is not, and 
neglect to seek it where it is. 


* Two famous robbers who infested Attica, and were at last killed 
by Theseus. —C. 


148 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS, 


CHAPTER XVII. 


HOW TO APPLY GENERAL PRINCIPLES TO PARTICULAR 
CASES. 


7 HAT is the first business of one who studies 
philosophy? To part with self-conceit. For 

jt is impossible for any one to begin to learn what he 
thinks that he already knows. We all go to the phi- 
lesophers, talking at random upon negative and posi- 
tive duties ; good and evil; fair and base, We praise, 
censure, accuse ; we judge and dispute about fair and 
base cnterprises. And yet for what do we go to the 
philosophers? To learn what we suppose ourselves 
not to know. And what is this? Propositions. We 
are desirous to hear what the philosophers say, for its 
elegance and acuteness; and some with a view only 
to gain. Now it is ridiculous to suppose, that a per- 
son will learn anything but what he desires to learn ; 
or make an improvement, in what he does not learn. 
But most are deceived, in the same manner_as Theo- 
pompus, the orator, when he blames Plato for defin- 
ing everything. “or,” he says, “did none of us, 
before you, use the words good and just; or did we 
utter them as empty sounds, without understanding 
what each of them meant?” Why, who tells you, 
Theopompus, that we had not natural ideas and gen- 
eral principles as to each of these? But it is not 
possible te apply principles in detail, without having 
minutely distinguished them, and examined what, 
details appertain to each. You may make the same 
_ objection te the physicians. For who of us did not 
use the words wholesome and unwholesome, before 


‘ 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 149 


Hippocrates was born ; or did we utter them as empty 
sounds? For we have some general conception of 
what is wholesome too; but we cannot apply it. 
Hence one says, let the patient abstain from meat; 
another, give it to him: one says, let him be bled ; 
another, cup him. And what is the reason, but not 
being able to adapt the general conception of whole- 
someness to particular cases? Thus, too, in life; who 
of us does not talk of good or evil, advantageous and 
disadvantageous ; for who of us has not a general 
conception of each of these? But is it then a dis- 
tinct and perfect one? Show me this. 

“ How shall I show it?” 

Apply it properly in detail. Plato, to go no fur- 
ther, puts definitions under the general head of use- 
ful; but you, under that of useless. Can both of 
you be right? How is it possible? Again; does not 
one man adapt the general conception of good, to 
tiches? Another, not to riches, but to pleasure, or 
health? In general, tinless we who use words employ 
them vaguely, or without proper care in discrimina- 
tion, why do we differ? Why do we wrangle? Why 
do we censure éach other? But what occasion have I 
to mention this mutual contradiction ? If you your 
sélf apply your principles properly, how comes it to 
pass, that you do not prosper? Why do you meet 
with any hindrance? Let us for the present omit 
our second point, concerning the pursuits, and the 
duties relative to them: let us omit the third tod, 
doncerning assent. I waive all these for you. Let 
us insist only on the first ;* which affords almost a 
sensible proof, that you do not properly apply your 
principles. You desire what is possible in itself, and 


* The topic of the Desires and Aversions. — C. 


150 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


possible for you. Why then are you hindered? Why 
are not you in a prosperous way? You do not shrink 
from the.inevitable. Why then do you incur anything 
undesirable? Why are you unfortunate? When you 
desire anything, why does it not happen? When you 
do not desire it, why happens it? For this is the 
greatest proof of ill success and misery: “I desire 
something and it does not happen ; and what is more 
wretched than I?” From such impatience Medea 
came to murder her own children; a lofty action in 
this point of view alone, that she had a proper impres- 
sion of what it was to fail of one’s aim. “ Thus I 
shall punish him who has injured and dishonored 
me ; and what is so wicked a wretch good for? But 
how is this to be effected? Iwill murder the chil- 
dren; but that will be punishing myself. And what 
care I?” This is the error of a powerful soul. For 
she knew not where the fulfilment of our desires is to 
be found ; that it is not to behad from without, nor by 
altering the appointment of things. Do not demand 
the man for your husband, and nothing which you 
do desire will fail to happen. Do not desire to keep 
him to yourself. Do not desire to stay at Corinth, 
and, in a word, have no will, but the will of God; 
and who shall restrain you; who shall compel you, 
any more than Zens? When you have such a guide, 
and conform your will and inclinations to his, why 
need you fear being disappointed ? Fix your desire 
and aversion on riches, or poverty; the one will 
be disappointed, the other incurred. Fix them on 
health, power, honors, your country, friends, children, 
in short, on anything beyond the control of your will, 
you will be unfortunate. But fix them on Zeus, on 
the gods. Give yourself up to these ; let these gov- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 151 


ern; let your powers be ranged on the.same side 
with these ; and how can you be any longer unpros- 
perous? But if, poor wretch, you envy, and pity, 
and are jealous, and tremble, and never cease a sin- 
gle day from complaining of yourself and the gods, 
why do you boast of your education? What edu- 
cation, man? That you have learned syllogisms? 
Why do not you, if possible, unlearn all these, and 
begin again ; convinced that hitherto you have not 
even touched upon the essential point? And, for the 
future, beginning from this foundation, proceed in or- 
der to the superstructure ; that nothing may happen 
which you do not wish, and that everything may 
happen which you desire. Give me but one young 
man, who brings this intention with him to the 
school; who is a champion for this point, and says, 
*T yield up all the rest; it suffices me, if once I be- 
come able to pass my life free from hindrance and 
grief; to stretch out my neck to all events as free; 
and to look up to Heaven, as the friend of God, fear- 
ing nothing that can happen.” Let any one of you 
show himself of such a disposition, that I may say, 
* Come into the place, young man, that is of right. 
your own ; for you are destined to be an ornament to 
philosophy. Yours are these possessions ; yours these. 
books ; yours these discourses.”” Then, when he has 
thoroughly mastered this first class, let him come to 
me again, aud say: “I desire indeed to be free from 
passion, and perturbation; but I desire. too, as a 
pious, a philosophic, and a diligent man, to know 
what is my duty to God, to my parents, to my rela- 
tions, to my country, and to strangers.” Come in- 
to the second class too; for this likewise is yours. 
“‘ But I have now sufficiently studied the second class 


152 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


too; and I would willingly be secure, and unshaken 
by error and delusion, not only when awake, but 
even when asleep; when warmed with wine; when 
diseased with the spleen.” You are becoming asa 
god, man; your aims are sublime! 

“Nay; but I, for my part, desire to understand 
what Chrysippus says, in his logical treatise of the 
Pseudomenos.” * — Go hang yourself, pitiful man, 
with only such an aim as this! What good will it 
do you? You will read the whole, lamenting all the 
while; and say to others, trembling, “Do as I do. 
Shall I read to you, my friend, and you to me? 
You write amazingly well; and you very finely imi- 
tate the style of Plato; and you, of Xenophon; and 
you, of Antisthenes.” And thus, having related your 
dreams to each other, you return again to the same 
state. Your desires and aversions, your pursuits, 
your intentions, your resolutions, your wishes and 
éndeavors, are just what they were. You do not so 
much as seek for one to advise you, but are offended 
when you hear such things as these; and cry, “ An 
ill-natured old man! He never wept over me, when 
I was setting out, nor said, To what a danger are 
you going to be exposed? If you come off safe, 
child, I will illuminate my house. This would have 
been the part of a man of feeling.” Truly, it will be 
a mighty happiness, if you do come off safe: it will 
be worth while to make an illumination. For you 
ought to be immortal, and exempt from sickness, to 
be sure. 


* The “ Pseudomenos ” was a famous problem among the Stoics, 
and it is this. When a person says, J lie; does he lie, or does he 
not? Ifhe lies, he speaks truth: if he speaks trath, he lies. Chry- 
sippus wrote six books upon it.— C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 153 


Throwing away then, I say, this self-conceit, by 
which we fancy we have gained some knowledge of 
what is nseful, we should come to philosophic reason- 
ing as we do to mathematics and music; otherwise 
we shall be far from making any improvement, even 
if we have read over all the compends and commen- 
taries, not only of Chrysippus, but of Antipater, and 
Archedemus too. 


CHAPTER XVIII 


HOW THE SEMBLANCES OF THINGS ARE TO BE 
COMBATED. 


VERY habit and faculty is preserved and in- 
creased by correspondent actions; as the habit 
of walking, by walking ; of running, by running. If 
you would be a reader, read; ifa writer, write. But 
if you do not read for a month together, but do some- 
thing else; you will see what will be tlic consequence. 
So, after sitting still for ten days, get up and attempt 
to take a long walk; and you will find low your legs 
are weakened. Upon the whole then, whatever you 
would make habitual, practise it; and, if you would 
not make a thing habitual, do not practise it, but 
habituate yourself to something else. 

It is the same with regard to the operations of the 
soul. Whenever you are angry, be assured, that it 
is not only a present evil, but that you have increased 
a habit, and added fuel to a fire. When you are over- 
come by the scductions of a woman, do not consider 
it as a single defeat alone, but that you have fed, that 
you have increased, your dissoluteness. For it is im- 


154 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


possible, but that habits and faculties must either be 
first produced, or strengthened and increased, by cor- 
responding actions. Hence the philosophers derive 
the growth of all maladies. When yon once desire 
money, for example, if reason be applied to produce 
a sense of the evil, the desire ceases, and the govern- 
ing faculty of the mind regains its authority ; where- 
as, if you apply no remedy, it returns no more to its 
former state, but, being again similarly excited, it 
kindles at the desire more quickly than before; and 
by frequent repetitions, at last becomes callous, and 
by this malady is the love of money fixed. For he 
who has had a fever, even after it has left him, is not 
in the same state of health as before, unless he was 
perfectly cured; and the same thing happens in 
distempers of the soul likewise. There are certain 
traces and blisters left in it; which, unless they are 
well effaced, whenever a new hurt is received in the 
same part, instead of blisters will become sores. 

If you would not be of an angry temper, then, do 
not feed the habit. Give it nothing to help its in- 
crease. Be quiet at first, and reckon the days in 
which you have not been angry. I used to be angry 
every day; now every other day; then every third 
and fourth day; and if you miss it so long as thirty 
days, offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving to God. For 
habit is first weakened, and then entirely destroyed. 
“T was not vexed to-day; nor the next day; uor for 
three or four months after;.but restrained myself 
under provocation.” Be assured, that you are in 
an excellent way. ‘To-day, when I saw a handsome 
person, I did not say to myself, O that I could possess 
her! aud how happy is her husband” (for he who 
says this, says too, how happy is her gallant); “nor 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 155 


did I go on. to fancy her in my arms.” On this I 
stroke my head, and say, Well done, Epictetus; thou 
hast solved a hard problem, harder than the chief syl- 
logism. But, if even the lady should happen to be 
willing and give me intimations of it, aud send for 
me, and press my hand, and place herself next to 
me; and I should then forbear, and get the victory ; 
that would be a triumph beyond all the forms of logic. 
This is the proper subject for exultation, and not one’s 
power in handling the syllogism. 

How then is this to be effected? Be willing to 
approve yourself to yourself. Be willing to appear 
beautiful in the sight of God; be desirous to con- 
verse in purity with your own pure mind, and with 
God ; and then, if any such semblance bewilders you, 
Plato directs you: “ Have recourse to expiations ; 
go a suppliant to the temples of the averting deities.” 
It is sufficient, however, if you propose to yourself 
the example of wise and good men, whether alive or 
dead; and compare your conduct with theirs. Go 
to Socrates, and see him placed beside his beloved, 
yet not seduced by youth and beauty. Consider 
what a victory he was conscious of obtaining! What 
an Olympic triumph! How near does he rank to 
Hercules! * So that, by Heaven, one might justly sa- 
lute him; hail! wondrous victor ! | instead of those 
sorry boxers and wrestlers, and the gladiators who 
resemble them. 

By placing such an example before you, you will 


* Hercules is said to have been the author of the gymnastic games ; 
and the first victor. Those who afterwards conqucred in wrestling, 
and the pancratium, were numbered from him. — C. 

+ This pompous title was given to those who had been victors in 
all the Olympic games. — C. 


156 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


conquer any alluring semblance, and not be drawn 
away by it. But in the first place, be not hurried 
away by excitement; but say, Semblance, wait for 
me alittle. Let me see what you are, and what you 
represent. Let me try you. Then, afterwards, do 
not suffer it to go on drawing gay pictures of what 
will follow ; if you do, it will lead you wherever it 
pleases. But rather oppose to it some good and no- 
ble semblance, and banish this base one. If you are 
habituated to this kind of exercise, you will see what 
shoulders, what nerves, what sinews, you will have. 
But uow itis mere trifling talk, and nothing more. 
He is the true athlete, who trains himself agdinst 
such semblances as these. Stay, wretch, do not be 
hurried away. The combat is great, the achievement 
divine; for émpire, for freedom, for prosperity, for 
tranquillity. Remember God. Invoke him for your 
aid and protector ; as sailors do Castor and Pollux, 
in a storm. For what storm is greater than that 
which arises from these perilous semblances, contend- 
ing to overset our reason? Indeed what is the storm 
itself, but a semblance? For, do but take away 
the fear of death, and let there be as many thunders 
and lightnings as you please, you will find, that to 
the reason all is serenity and calm; but if you are 
onee defeated, and say, you will get the victory an- 
other time, and then the same thing over again; 
assure yourself that you will at last be reduced to 
so weak and wretched a condition, you will not so 
much as know when you do amiss; but you will 
éven begin to make defences for your behavior, and 
thus verify the saying of Hesiod : — 


With constant ills, the dilatory strive.* 


* Works and Days, v. 388. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 157 


CHAPTER XIX. 


CONCERNING THOSE WHO EMBRACE PHILOSOPHY ONLY 
IN WORDS. 


HE science of “the ruling argument’ * appears 

to have its rise from hence. Of the following 
propositions, any two imply a contradiction to the 
third. They are these. ‘That everything past is 
necessarily true”; ‘‘ That an impossibility is not the 
consequence of a possibility’’; and, “That some- 
thing is a possibility, which neither is nor will be 
true.” Diodorus, perceiving this contradiction, com- 
bined the first two, to prove, that nothing is possible, 
which neither is nor will be true. Some again hold 
the second and third; “that something is possible, 
which neither is nor will be true”; and, “that an 
impossibility is not the consequence of a possibility ” ; 
and consequently assert, “That not everything past 
is necessarily true.” This way Cleanthes and his 
followers took; whom Antipater copiously defends. 
Others, lastly, maintain the first and third; “ that 
something is possible, which neither is nor will be 
true’’; and “that everything past is necessarily 
true’; but then, “that an impossibility may be the 
consequence of a possibility.” But all these three 
propositions cannot be at once maintained, because 
of their mutual contradiction. 

If any one should ask me then, which of them I 
maintain; I answer him, that really I cannot tell. 
But I have heard it related, that Diodorus held one 
opinion about them; the followers of Panthedes, I 


* A logical subtlety. — H. 


158 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


think, and Cleanthes, another; and Chrysippus 3 
third. 

“ What then is your opinion ?”’ 

Texpress none. I was born to examine things as 
they appear to my own mind; to compare what is 
said by others, and thence to form some conviction 
of my own on any topic. Of these things I have 
merely technical knowledge. Who was the father 
of Hector? Priam. Who were his brothers? Paris 
and Deiphobus. Who was his mother? Hecuba. 
This I have heard related. From whom? Homer. 
But I believe Hellanicus, and other. authors, have 
written on the same subject. And what better ac- 
count have I of “the ruling argument”? But, if I 
were vain enough, I might, especially at some enter- 
tainment, astonish all the company by an enumeration 
of authors relating to it. Chrysippus has written 
wonderfully, in his first Book of Possibilities. Clean- 
thes and Archedemus have each written separately 
on this subject. Antipater too has written, not only 
in his Treatise of Possibilities, but especially in a dis- 
course on “the ruling argument.” Have you not 
read the work? “No.” Read it then. And what 
good will it do him? He will be more trifling and 
impertinent than he is already. For what else have 
you gained by reading it? What conviction have. 
you formed upon this subject? But you tell us of 
Helen, and Priam, and the isle of Calypso, some- 
thing which never was, nor ever will be. And in 
these matters, indeed, it is of no great consequence 
if you retain the story, without forming any prin- 
ciple of your own. But it is our misfortune to do 
so, much more, in morality, than wpon such subjects 
as these. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 159 


“Talk to me concerning good and evil.” 
Hear : 


“Winds blew from Ilium to Ciconian shores.” * 


Of things, some are good, some evil, and some in- 
different. Now the good are the virtues, and what- 
ever partakes of them; and the evil, vices, and what 
partakes of vice; the indifferent lie between these, 
as riches, health, life, death, pleasure, pain. 

** Whenee do you know this?” 

[Suppose I say,] Hellanicus says it, in his Egyp- 
tian History. For what does it signify, whether one 
quotes the history of Hellanieus, or the ethies of 
Diogenes, or Chrysippus, or Cleanthes? Have you 
then examined any of these things, and formed con- 
vietions of your own? But show me, how you are 
used to exercise yourself on shipboard. Remember 
these distinetions, when the mast rattles, and some 
idle fellow stands by you, while you are screaming, 
and says: ‘‘ For heaven’s sake, talk as you did a little 
while ago. Is it vice to suffer shipwreek? Or does 
it partake of viee?’? Would you not take up a log, 
and throw it at his head? ‘‘ What have we to do 
with you, sir? Weare perishing, and you come and 
jest.” Again; if Cesar should summon you, to an- 
swer an aceusation, remember these distinctions. If, 
when you are going in, pale and trembling, any one 
should meet you and say, “ Why do you tremble, sir? 
What is this affair you are engaged in? Doth Casar, 
within there, give virtue and viee to those who ap- 
proach him ?’”’—“ What, do you too insult me, and 
add to my evils?“ Nay, but tell me, philoso- 
pher, why you tremble? Is there any other danger, 


* Homer, Odyssey, IX. 39. The expression became proverbial, 
signifying “from bad to worsc.”” — H. 


160 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


but death, or a prison, or bodily pain, or exile, or 
slander ?’? —“ Why, what else should there be?” — 
“ Are any of these vice? Or do they partake of vice? 
What, then, did you yourself use to say of these 
things?’ —“ What have you to do with me, sir? 
My own evils are enough for me.”’—“ You say 
rightly. Your own evils are indeed enough for you ; 
your baseness, your cowardice, and that arrogance 
by which you were elated, as you sat in the schools. 
Why did you assume plumage not yourown? Why 
did you call yourself a Stoic ?”’ 

Observe yourselves thus in your actions, and you 
will find of what sect you are. You will find, that 
most of you are Epicureans; a few Peripatetics, and 
those but loose ones. For by what action will you 
prove that you think virtue equal, and even superior, 
to all other things? Show me a Stoic, if you have 
one. Where? Or how should you? You can show, 
indeed, a thousand who repeat the Stoic reasonings. 
But do they repeat the Epicurean less well? Are 
they not just as perfect in the Peripatetic? Who then 
isa Stoic? As we call that a Phidian statue, which 
is formed according to the art of Phidias; so show 
me some one person formed according to the princi- 
ples which he professes. Show me one who is sick, 
and happy ; in danger, and happy ; dying, and happy ; 
exiled, and happy ; disgraced, and happy. Show him 
tome; for, by Heaven, I long to see a Stoic. But you 
have not one fully developed? Show me then one 
who is developing; one who is approaching towards 
this character. Do me this favor. Do not refuse an 
old man a sight which he has never yet seen. Do you 
suppose that you are to show the Jupiter or Minerva 
of Phidias, a work of ivory or gold? Let any of you 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 161 


show me a human soul, desiring to be in unity with 
God; not to accuse either God or man; not to be 
disappointed of its desire, nor incur its aversion; not 
to be angry ; not to be envious; not to be jealous; in 
a word, desiring from a man to become a god; and, 
in this poor mortal body, aiming to have fellow- 
ship with Zeus. Show him to me. But you cannot. 
Why then do you impose upon yourselves, and play 
tricks with others? Why do you put on a dress not 
your own; and walk about in it, mere thieves and 
pilferers of names and things which do not belong to 
you? Iam now your preceptor, and you come to be 
instructed by me. And indeed my aim is to secure 
you from being restrained, compelled, hindered ; to 
make you free, prosperous, happy ; looking to God 
upon every occasion, great or small. And you come 
to learn and study these things. Why then do you 
not finish your work, if you have the proper aims, 
and I, besides the aim, the proper qualifications ? 
What is wanting? When I see an artificer, and the 
materials lying ready, I await the work. Now here 
is the artificer ; here are the materials; what is it we 
want? Is not the thing capable of being taught? It 
is. Is it not in our own power then? The only thing 
of all others that is so. Neither riches, nor health, 
nor fame, nor, in short, anything else is in our power, 
except a right use of the semblances of things. This 
alone is, by nature, not subject to restraint, not sub 
ject to hindrance. Why then do not you finish it? 
Tell me the cause. It must be my fault, or yours, or 
from the nature of the thing. The thing itself is prac- 
ticable, and the only thing in our power. The fault 
then must be either in me, or in you, or, more truly, 
in both. Well then, shall we at length begin to carry 
ul 


162 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


such an aim with us? Let us lay aside all that is past. 
Let us begin. Only believe me, and you shall see. 


CHAPTER XX. 
CONCERNING THE EPICUREANS AND ACADEMICS. 


THINGS true and evident must, of necessity, be 
reeognized even by those who would contradict 
them. And perhaps one of the strongest proofs that 
there is such a thing as evidence, is the necessity 
which compels even those who contradict it to make 
use of it. If a person, for instance, should deny that 
anything is universally true, he will be obliged to as- 
sert the contrary, that nothing is universally true. 
Foolish man, not so. For what is this, but an uni- 
versal statement?* Again; suppose any one should 
come and say, “Know that there is nothing to be 
known; but all things are uncertain”; or another, 
“ Believe me, for your good, that no man ought to be 
believed in anything”; or a third, “Learn from me 
that nothing is to be learned; I tell you this, and 
will teach the proof of it, if you please.” Now what 
difference is there between such as these, and those 
who call themselves Academics, — who say to us, ‘* Be 
convinced, that no one ever is convinced ; believe us, 
that nobody believes anybody ”’ ? 

Thus also, when Epicurus would destroy the nat- 
ural tie between mankind, he makes use of the very 
thing he is destroying. For what says he? “Be 
not deceived; be not seduced and mistaken. There 
is no natural tie between reasonable beings. Believe 


* Translation conjectural. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 163 


me. Those who say otherwise mislead and impose 
upon you.”’—— Why are you concerned for us then? 
Let us be deceived. You will fare never the worse, 
if all the rest of us are persuaded, that there is a nat- 
ural tie between mankind; and that it is by all means 
to be preserved. Nay, it will be much safer and bet- 
ter. Why do you give yourself any trouble about us, 
sir? Why do you break your rest for us? Why do 
you light yourlamp? Why do you rise early? Why 
do you compose so many volumes? Is it that none 
of us should be deceived concerning the gods, as if 
they took any care of men? Or that we may not sup- 
pose the essence of good consists in anything but. in 
pleasure? For if these things be so, lie down and 
sleep, and lead the life of which you judge yourself 
worthy ; that of a mere worm. Eat, drink, debauch, 
snore. What is it to you, whether others think right- 
ly or wrongly about these things? For what have 
you to do with us? You take care of sheep, be- 
cause they afford their milk, their wool, and at last 
their flesh. And would it not be a desirable thing 
that men might be so lulled and enchanted by the 
Stoics as to give themselves up to be milked and 
fleeced by you, and such as you? Should not these 
doctrines be taught to your brother Epicureans only, 
and concealed from the rest of the world; who should 
by all means, above all things, be persuaded, that we 
have a natural tie with each other, and that self-com- 
mand is a good thing, in order that all may be kept 
safe for you? Or is this tie to be preserved towards 
some and not towards others? Towards whom, then, 
is it to be preserved? Towards such as mutually pre- 
serve, or such as violate it? And who violate it more 
than you, who teach such doctrines ? 


164 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


What was it, then, that waked Epicurus from his 
sleep, and compelled him to write what he did; what 
else, but that which is of all influences the most pow- 
erful among mankind, Nature; which draws every 
one, however unwilling and reluctant, to its own pur- 
poses. For since, she says, you think that there is 
no tie between mankind, write out this doctrine, and 
leave it for the use of others; and break your sleep 
upon that account; and by your own practice con- 
fute your own principles. Do we say, that Orestes 
was roused from sleep because driven by the furies ; 
and was not Epicurus waked by sterner furies and 
avengers, which would not suffer him to rest, but 
compelled him to utter his own ills, as wine and mad- 
ness do the priests of Cybele? So strong and uncon- 
querable a thing is human nature! For how can a 
vine have the properties not of a vine, but of an olive- 
tree? Or an olive-tree, not those of an olive-tree, but 
ofavine? Itisimpossible. Itisinconceivable. Nei- 
ther, therefore, is it possible for a human creature en- 
tirely to lose human affections. But even those who 
have undergone a mutilation, cannot have their in- 
clinations also mutilated; and so Epicurus, when he 
had mutilated al} the offices of a man, of a master of 
a family, of a citizen, and of a friend, did not muti- 
late the inclinations of humanity; for this he could 
not do; any more than the idle Academics can throw 
away or blind their own senses, though this be the 
point they chiefly labor. What a misfortune is it, 
when any one, after having received from Nature 
standards and rules for the knowledge of truth, does 
not strive to add to these, and make up their deficien- 
eies ; but, on the contrary, endeavors to take away 
and destroy whatever truth may be known even by 
them. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 165 


What say you, philosopher? What do you think 
of piety and sanctity ?-—“‘If you please, I will prove 
that they are good.” — Pray do prove it; that our 
citizens may be converted, and honor the Deity, and 
may no longer neglect what is of the highest impor- 
tance. ‘Do you accept these demonstrations, then ?” 
I have, and I thank you. “Since you are so well 
pleased with this, then, learn these contrary propo- 
sitions; that there are no gods, or, if there are, 
that they take no care of mankind, neither have we 
any concern with them ; that this piety and sanctity, 
so much talked of by many, are only an imposition of 
boasting and sophistical men ; or, perhaps, of legisla- 
tors, for a terror and restraint to injustice.” — Well 
done, philosopher. Our citizens are much the better 
for you. You have already brought hack all the 
youth to a contempt of the Deity. ‘ What! does 
not this please you, then? Learn next, that justice 
is nothing; that shame is folly; that the paternal 
relation is nothing; the filial, nothing.” Well said, 
philosopher; persist, convince the youth; that we 
may have many more, to think and talk like yon. 
By such doctrines as these, no doubt, have our well- 
governed states flourished! Upon these was Sparta 
founded! Lycurgus, by his laws, and method of 
education, introduced such persuasions as these ; 
that it is not base to be slaves, rather than honora- 
ble; nor honorable to be free, rather than base! 
They who diced at Thermopyle, died from such prin- 
ciples as these! And from what other doctrines did 
‘the Athenians leave their city ?* 

* When the Athenians found themselves unable to resist the forces 


of the Persians, they left their city; and, having removed their wives 
and ehildren, and their movable effects, to Trozen and Salamis, 


166 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


And yet, they who talk thus marry, and produce 
children, and engage in public affairs, and get them- 
selves made priests and prophets. Of whom? Of 
gods that have no existence. And they consult the 
Pythian priestess, only to hear falsehoods, and inter- 
pret the oracles to others. O! monstrous impudence 
and imposture ! 

What are you doing, man?* You contradict your- 
self every day; and you will not give up these paltry 
eayvils. When you eat, where do you put your hand? 
To your mouth, or to your eye? When you bathe, 
where do you go? Do you ever call a kettle a dish, 
or a spoon a spit? If 1 were a servant to one of 
these gentlemen, were it at the hazard of being flayed 
every day, I would plague him. “Throw some oil 
into the bath, boy.” I would take pickle, and pour 
upon his head. “ What is this?” Really, sir, I was 
impressed by a certain semblance so like oil as not to 
be distinguished from it. “Give me the soup.” I 
would carry him a dish full of vinegar. “Did I 
not ask for the soup?” Yes, sir, this is the soup. 
“Ts not this vinegar?’’ Why so, more than soup? 
“Take it and smell it, take it and taste it.” How do 
you know, then, but our senses deceive us? If I had 
three or four fellow-servants to join with me, I would 
make him either choke with passion and burst, or 
change his opinions. But now they insult us, by 
making use of the gifts of nature, while in words 
they destroy them. Those must be grateful and 
modest men, at least, who, while eating their daily 


went on board their ships, and defended the liberty of Greece by 
their fleet. — C. 

* What follows is against the Aeademics, who denicd the evidence 
of the senses. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 167 


bread, dare to say, “‘ We do not know whether there 
be any such beings as Demeter, or Core, or Pluto.” 
Not to mention, that while they possess the blessings 
of night and day, of the annual seasons, of the stars, 
the earth and the sea, they are not the least affected 
by any of these things; but only study to throw out 
some idle problem, and when they have thus relieved 
themselves, go and bathe; but take not the least care 
what they say, nor on what subjects, nor to whom, 
nor what may be the consequence of their talk; 
whether any well-disposed young man, on hearing 
such doctrines, may not be affected by them, and so 
affected as entirely to lose the seeds of his good dis- 
position ; whether they may not furnish an adulterer 
with occasions of growing shameless in his guilt; 
whether a public plunderer may not find excuses 
from these doctrines; whether he, who neglects his 
parents, may not gain an additional confidence from 
them. 

“What things, then, in your opinion, are good and 
evil, fair and base; such things, or such things?” 
But why should one argue any more with such as 
these, or interchange opinions, or endeavor to con- 
vince them? By Zeus, one might sooner hope to con- 
vince the most unnatural debauchees, than those, 
who are thus deaf and blind to their own ills. 


168 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER XXI. 
OF INCONSISTENCY. 


HERE are some things which men confess with 
ease; and others with difficulty. No one, for 
instance, will confess himself a fool, or a blockhead ; 
but, on the contrary, you will hear every one say, “I 
wish my fortune were in proportion to my abilities.” 
But they easily confess themselves fearful, and say, 
“T am somewhat timorous, I confess; but in other 
respects you will not find me a fool.” No one will 
easily confess himself intemperate in his desires ; 
upon no account dishonest, nor indeed very envious, 
or meddling; but many confess themselves to have 
the weakness of being compassionate. What is the 
reason of all this? The principal reason is, an incon- 
sistency and confusion in what relates to good and 
evil. But different people have different motives, 
and in general, whatever they imagine to be base, 
they do not absolutely confess. Fear and compas- 
sion they imagine to belong. to a well-meaning dis- 
position ; but stupidity, to a slave. Offences against 
society they do not own; but, in most faults, they 
are brought to a confession, chiefly from imagining 
that there is something involuntary in them; as in 
fear and compassion. And, though a person should 
in some measure confess himself intemperate in his 
desires, he accuses his passion, and expects forgive- 
ness, as for an involuntary fault. But dishonesty is 
not imagined to be, by any means, involuntary. In 
jealousy too, there is something they suppose involun- 
tary ; and this, likewise, in some degree, they confess. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 169 


Conversing therefore with such men, thus con- 
fused, thus ignorant what they say, and what are or 
are not their ills, whence they have them, and how 
they may be delivered from them; it is worth while, 
I think, to ask one’s self continually, “‘ Am I too one 
of these? What'do I imagine myself to be? How 
do I conduct myself? As a prudent, as a temperate 
man? Do I, too, ever talk at this rate; that I am 
sufficiently instructed for what may happen? Have 
I that persuasion, that I know nothing, which be- 
comes one who knows nothing? Do I go to a mas- 
ter, as to an oracle, prepared to obey; or do IJ also, 
like a mere driveller, enter the school, only to learn 
and understand books which I did not understand be- 
fore; or, perhaps, to explain them to others?” 

You have been fighting at home, with your man- 
servant; you have turned the house upside-down, 
and alarmed the neighborhood ; and do you come 
to me witha pompous show of wisdom, and sit and 
criticise how I explain a sentence, how I prate what- 
ever comes into my head ? Do you come, envious and 
dejected, that nothing has come from home for you ; 
and in the midst of the disputations, sit thinking on 
nothing, but how your father or your brother may 
treat you? ‘“ What are they saying about me at 
home? Now they think I am improving, and say, he 
will come back with universal knowledge. I wish I 
could learn everything before my return; but this 
requires much labor,and nobody sends me anything. 
The baths are very bad at Nicopolis; and things go 
very ill both at home, and here.” 

After all this, it is said, nobody is the better for the 
philosophic school. Why, who comes to the school ? 
I mean, who comes to be reformed? Who, to sub- 


170 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


mit his principles to correction ; who, with a sense of 
his wants? Why do you wonder, then, that you 
bring back from the school the very thing you ear- 
ried there? For you do not come to lay aside, or 
correct, or change, your principles. How should you? 
Far from it. Rather consider this, therefore, whether 
you have not what you have come for. You have 
come to talk about theorems. Well; and are you not 
more inipertinently talkative than you were? Do 
not these paltry theorems furnish you with matter 
for ostentation? Do you not solve convertible and 
hypothetical syllogisms? Why, then, are you still 
displeased, if you have the very thing for which you 
came ? 

“Very true; but, if my child, or my brother 
should die; or if I must die or be tortured myself, 
what good will these things do me?’”? Why, did you 
come for this? Did you attend upon me for this ? 
Was it upon any such account, that you ever lighted 
your lamp, or sat up at night? Or did you, when 
you went into the walk, propose any delusive sem- 
blance to your own mind to be discussed, instead 
of a syllogism? Did any of you ever go through such 
a subject jointly? And, after all, you say, theorems 
are useless. To whom? To such as apply them ill. 
For medicines for the eyes are not useless to those 
who apply them when and as they ought. Fomenta- 
tions are not useless, dumb-bells are not useless; 
but they are useless to some, and, on the contrary, 
useful to others. If you should ask me, now, are 
syllogisms useful? I should answer, that they are 
useful ; and, if you please, I will show you how. 
“‘ Will they be of service to me, then?” Why, did 
you ask, man, whether they would be useful to you, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 171 


or in general? If any one in a dysentery should 
ask me, whether acids be useful; I should answer, 
they are. “ Are they useful for me, then?” I say, 
no. First try to get the flux stopped, and the ul- 
ceration healed. Do you too first get your ulcers 
healed, your fluxes stopped. Quiet your mind, and 
bring it free from distraction to the school; and then 
you will know what force there is in reasoning. 


CHAPTER XXII. 
OF FRIENDSHIP. 


O whatever objects a person devotes his attention, 
these objects he probably loves. Do men ever de- 
vote their attention then, to [what they think] evils ? 
By no means. Or even to things indifferent? No, 
nor this. It remains then, that good must be the 
sole object of their attention ; and, if of their atten- 
tion, of their love too. Whoever, therefore, under- 
stands good, is capable likewise of love; and he who 
cannot distinguish good from evil, and things indiffer- 
ent from both, how is it possible that he can love ? 
The wise person alone, then, is capable of loving. 

“How so? Iam not this wise person, yet I love 
my child.” 

I protest it surprises me, that you should, in the 
first place, confess yourself unwise. For in what are 
you deficient? Have not you the use of your senses ? 
Do you not distinguish the semblances of things? 
Do you not provide such food and clothing and hab- 
itation as are suitable to you? Why then do you con- 
fess that you want wisdom? In truth, because you 


172 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


are often struck and disconcerted by semblances, 
and their speciousness gets the better of you; and 
hence you sometimes suppose the very same things 
to be good, then evil, and lastly, neither; and, in a 
word, you grieve, you fear, you envy, you are discon- 
certed, you chauge. Is it from this that you con- 
fess yourself unwise? And are you not changeable 
too in love? Riches, pleasure, in short, the very same 
things, you sometimes esteem good, and at other times 
evil. And do you not esteem the same persons too, 
alternately as good and bad, at one time treating 
them with kindness, at another with enmity, at one 
time commending, and at another censuring them? 

“Yes. This too is the case with me.” 

Well then, can he who is deceived in another, be 
his friend, think you ? 

“ No, surely.” 

Or does he, who loves him with a changeable affec- 
tion, bedr him genuine good will? 

“Nor he, neither.” 

Or he, who now vilifies, then admires him ? 

“ Nor hie.” 

Do you not often see little dogs caressing, and 
playing with each other, so that you would say, 
nothing could be more friendly; but, to learn what 
this friendship is, throw 2 bit of meat between them, 
and you will see. Do you too throw a bit of an es- 
tate betwixt you and your son, and you will see, 
that he will quickly wish you under ground, and you 
him ; and then you, no doubt, on the other hand will 
exclaim, What a son have I brought up! He would 
bury mo alive ! — Throw in a pretty girl, and the old 
fellow and the young one will both fall in love with 
her; or let fame or danger intervene, the words of 
the father of Admetus will be yours: 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 173 


«Yon love to see the light. Doth not your father # 
You fain wonld still behold it. Would not he?” * 


Do you suppose that he did not love his own child 
when it was little? That he was not in agonies 
when it had a fever, and often wished to undergo 
that fever in its stead? But, after all, when the trial 
comes home, you see what expressions he uses. Were 
not Eteocles and Polynices born of the same mother, 
and of the same father? Were they not brought up, 
and did they not live; and eat, and sleep, together ? 
Did not they kiss and fondle each other? So that 
any one, who saw them, would have laughed at all 
the paradoxes which philosophers utter about love. 
And yet, when a kingdom, like a bit of meat, was 
thrown betwixt them, see what they say. 

Polynices, ‘ Where wilt thou stand before the towers?” 
Eteocles. « Why askest thon this of me?” 


Pol. “I will oppose myself to thee, to slay thee.” 
Et. “Me too the desire of this seizes.” t 


Such are the prayers they offer. Be not therefore 
deceived. No living being is held by anything so 
strongly as by its own needs. Whatever therefore 
appears a hindrance to these, be it brother, or father, 
or child, or mistress, or friend, is hated, abhorred, 
execrated ; for by nature it loves nothing like its own. 
needs. This motive is father, and brother, and fam- 
ily, and country,and God. Whenever, therefore, the 
Gods seem to hinder this, we vilify even them, and 
throw down their statues, and burn their temples ; 


* Euripides, Alcestis, v. [691] 701. The second line, as quoted by 
Epictetus, is not found in the received editions. Pheres, the father of 
Admetus, is defending himself for not consenting to die in place of 
his son. — H. 

t Euripides, Phenisse, y. 630, 631. 


174 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


as Alexander ordered the temple of Asculapius to be 
burnt, because he had lost the man he loved. 

When therefore any one identifies his interest with 
those of sanctity, virtue, country, parents, and friends, 
all these are secured; but whicnever he places his 
interest in anything else than friends, country, fam- 
ily, and justice, then these all give way, borne down 
by the weight of self-interest. For wherever J and 
mine are placed, thither must every living being 
gravitate. If in body, that will sway us; if in our 
own will, that; if in externals, these. If, there- 
fore, I rest my personality in the will, then only shall 
I be a friend, a son, or a father, such as I ought. 
For, in that case, it will be for my interest to pre- 
serve the faithful, the modest, the patient, the absti- 
nent, the beneficent character ; to keep the relations 
of life inviolate. But, if I place my personality in one 
thing, and virtue in another, the doctrine of Epicurus 
will stand its ground, that virtue is nothing, or mere 
opinion. 

From this ignorance it was, that the Athenians and 
Lacedemonians quarrelled with each other, and the 
Thebans with both; the Persian king with Greece, 
and the Macedonians with both; and now the Ro- 
mans with the Getes. And, in still remoter times 
the Trojan war arose from the same cause. Alexan- 
der [Paris] was the guest of Menelaus ; and whoever 
had seen the mutual proofs of good will, that passed 
between them, would never have believed that they 
were not friends. But a tempting bait, a pretty 
woman, was thrown in between them; and thence 
came war. At present, therefore, when you see that 
dear brothers have, in appearance, but one soul, do 
not immediately pronounce upon their love; not 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 175 
though they should swear it, and affirm it was impos- 
sible to live asunder. For the governing faculty of a 
bad man is faithless, unsettled, undiscriminating, suc- 
cessively vanquished by different semblances. But 
inquire, not as others do, whether they were born of 
the same parenis, and brought up together, and 
under the same preceptor; but this thing only, in 
what they place their interest; in externals, or in 
their own wills. If in externals, you can no more 
pronounce them friends, than you can call them 
faithful, or constant, or brave, or free; nay, nor even 
truly men, if you are wise. For it is no principle of 
humanity, that makes them bite and vilify each other, 
and take possession of public assemblies, as wild beasts 
do of solitudes and mountains ; and convert courts of 
justice into dens of robbers; that prompts them to 
be intemperate, adulterers, seducers ; or leads them 
into other offences, that men commit against cach 
other, — all from that one single error, by which they 
risk themselves, and their own concerns, on things 
uncontrollable by will. 

But if you hear, that these men in reality suppose 
good to be placed only in the will, and in a right use 
of things as they appear; no longer take the trouble 
of inquiring if they are father and son, or old com- 
panions and acquaintances; but boldly pronounce 
that they are friends, and also that they are faithful 
and just. For where else can friendship be met, but 
joined with fidelity and modesty, and the intercom- 
munication of virtue alone ? 

“ Well; but such a one paid me the utmost regard, 
for so long a time, and did he not love me?” 

How can you tell, foolish man, if that regard be 
any other than he pays to his shoes, or his horse, 


176 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


when he cleans them? And, how do you know but 
that when yon cease to be a necessary utensil, he may 
throw you away, like a broken stool ? 

“Well; but it is my wife, and we have lived 
together many years.” 

And how many did Eriphyle live with Amphia- 
raus; and was the mother of children, not a few? 
But a bauble came between them. What was this 
bauble? A false conviction concerning certain things. 
This turned her into a savage animal; this cut asun- 
der all love, and suffered neither the wife nor the 
mother to continue such.* 

Whoever therefore, among you, studies either to 
be or to gain a friend, let him cut up all false convic- 
tions by the root, hate them, drive them utterly out 
of his soul. Thus, in the first place, he will be secure 
from inward reproaches and contests; from vacilla- 
tion and self-torment. Then with respect to others ; to 
every like-minded person, he will be without disguise ; 
to such as are unlike, he will be patient, mild, gentle, 
and ready to forgive them, as failing in points of the 
greatest importance; but severe to none, being fully 
convinced of Plato’s doctrine, that the soul is never 
willingly deprived of truth. Without all this, you 
may, in many respects, live as friends do; and drink, 
and lodge, and travel together, and even be born of 
the same parents; and so may serpents too; but 
neither they nor you can ever be really friends, while 
your accustomed principles remain brutal and exe- 
crable. 


* Amphiaraus married Eriphyle, the sister of Adrastus, king of 
Argos, and was hetrayed by her for a golden chain. — C, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS., 177. 


CHAPTER XXIII. 
OF ELOQUENCE. 


BOOK will always be read with more pleasure 

and ease, if it be written in fair characters ; and 
so every one will the more easily attend to discourses 
likewise, if ornamented with proper and beautiful ex- 
pressions. Jt ought not then to be said, that there 
is no such thing as the faculty of eloquence; for this 
would be at once the part of an impious and timid 
person. Impious, because he dishonors the gifts of 
God ; just as if he should deny any use in the facul- 
ties of sight, hearing, and speech itself. Hath. God 
then given you eyes in vain? Is it in vain, that he 
hath ‘infused into them such a strong and. active 
spirit, as to be able to represent the forms of distant 
objects? What messenger is so quick and diligent ? 
Is it in vain, that he hath made the intermediate air 
so yielding and elastic, that sight penetrates through 
it? And is it in vain, that he hath made the light, 
without which all the rest would be useless? Man, 
be not ungrateful, nor, on the other hand, unmindful 
of your superior advantages ; but for sight, and hear- 
ing, and indeed for life itself, and the supports of it, 
as fruits, and wine, and oil, be thankful to God; but 
remember that He hath given you another thing, su- 
perior to them all, which uses them, proves them, 
estimates the value of each. For what is it that pro- 
nounces upon the value of each of these faculties ? 
Is it the faculty itself? Did you ever perceive the 
faculty of sight or hearing, to say anything concern- 
ing itself? Or wheat, or barley, or horses, or dogs? 

12 


178 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


No. These things are appointed as instruments and 
servants, to obey that which is capable of using things 
as they appear. If you inquire the ‘value of any- 
thing ; of what do you inquire? What is the faculty 
that answers you? How then can any faculty he 
superior to this, which uses all the rest as instru- 
ments, and tries and pronounces concerning each of 
them? For which of them knows what itself is; and 
what is its own value? Which of them knows, when 
it is to be used, and when not? Which is it, that 
opens and shuts the eyes, and turns them away from 
improper objects? Is it the faculty of sizht? No; 
but that of Will. Which is it, that opens and shuts 
the ears? Which is it, by which they are made curi- 
ous and inquisitive; or on the contrary deaf, and 
unaffected by what is said? Is it the faculty of hear- 
ing? No; buat that of Will. This, then, recognizing 
itself to exist amidst other faculties, all blind and 
deaf, and unable to discern anything but those offices, 
in which they are appointed to minister and serve; 
itself alone sees clearly, and distinguishes the value 
of each of the rest. Will this, I say, inform us, that 
anything is supreme, but itself? ‘What can the eye, 
when it is opened, do more than see? But whether 
we ought to look upon the wife of any one, and in 
what manner, what is it that decides us? The fae- 
ulty of Will. Whether we ought to believe, or dis- 
believe what is said or whether, if we do believe, we 
ought to be moved by it, or not, what is it that 
decides us? Is it not the faculty of Will? Again; 
the very faculty of eloquence, and that which orna- 
ments discourse, if any such peculiar faculty there 
be, what does it more than merely ornament and 
arrange expressions, as curlers do the hair? But 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 179 


whether it be better to speak, or to be silent; or 
better to speak in this, or in that manner; whether 
this be decent, or indecent; and the season and use 
of each ; what is it that decides for us, but the faculty 
of Will? What then, would you have it appear, and 
bear testimony against itself? What means this? 
If the case be thus, then that which serves may he 
superior to that to which it is subservient ; the hoarse 
to‘the rider ; the dog to the hunter; the instrument 
to the musician ; or servants to the king. What is 
it that makes use of all the rest? The Will. What 
takes care of all? The Will. What destroys the 
whole man, at one time, by hunger; at another, by a 
rope, or .a precipice? The Will. Has man, then, 
anything stronger than this? And how is it possible, 
that what is liable to restraint should be stronger than 
what is not? What has a natural power to restrain 
the faculty of sight? The Will and its workings. 
And it is the same with the faculties of hearing and 
of speech. And what has a natural power of re- 
straining the Will? Nothing beyond itself, only its 
own perversion. Therefore in the Will alone is vice: 
in the Will alone is virtue. 

Since, then, the Will is such a faculty, and placed 
in authority over all the rest, suppose it to come 
forth and say tous, that the body is, of all things, 
the most excellent! If even the body itself pro- 
nounced itself to be the most excellent, it could not 
be borne. But now, what is it, Epicurus, that pro- 
nounces all this? What was it, that composed vol- 
umes concerning “ the End,” “ the Nature of things,” 
“the Rule” ; that assumed a philosophic beard ; that, 
as it was dying, wrote, that it was “ then spending its 
last and happiest day ’’?* Was this the body, or was 

* These words are part of a letter written by Epicuras, when he-was 


180 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


it the faculty of Will? And can you, then, without 
madness, admit anything to be superior to this? 
Are you in reality so deaf and blind? What, then, 
does any one dishonor the other faculties? Heaven 
forbid! Does any one assert that there is no use or 
excellence in the faculty of sight? Heaven forbid! 
It would be stupid, impious, and ungrateful to God. 
But we render to each its due. There is some use 
in an ass, though not so much as in an ox; and ina 
dog, though not so much as in a servant: and in a 
servant, though not so much as in the citizens; and 
in the citizens, though not so much as in the magis- 
trates. And though some are more excellent than 
others, those uses, which the last afford, are not to 
be despised. The faculty of eloquence has thus its 
value, though not equal to that of the Will. When 
therefore I talk thus, let not any one suppose, that I 
would have you neglect eloquence, any more than 
your eyes, or ears, or hands, or feet, or clothes, or 
shoes. But if you ask me what is the most excellent 
of things, what shall I say? I cannot say, eloquence, 
but aright Will ; for it is this which makes use of that, 
and of all the other faculties, whether great or small. 
If this be set right, a bad man becomes good ; if it 
be wrong, a good man becomes wicked. By this we 
are unfortunate or fortunate ; we disapprove or ap- 
prove each other. In a word, it is this which, ne- 
glected, forms unhappiness; and, well cultivated, 
happiness. 

But to take away the faculty of eloquence, and to 
say, that it is in reality nothing, is not only ungrate- 
ful to those who gave it, but cowardly too. For such 
a person seems to me to be afraid, that, if there be 


dying, to one of his friends. Diog. Laert. X.22.—-C. The titles 
previously given are those of treatises by Epicurus. — H, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 181 


any such faculty, we may, on occasion, be compelled 
to respect it. Such are they too, who deny any 
difference between beauty and deformity. Was it 
possible, then, to be affected in the same manner 
by seeing Thersites, as by Achilles; by Helen, as by 
any other woman? These, also, are the foolish and 
clownish notions of those who are ignorant of the 
nature of things; and afraid that whoever perceives 
such a difference must presently be carried away, 
and overcome. But the great point is to leave to 
each thing its own proper faculty ; and then to see 
what the value of that faculty is, to learn what is 
the principal thing, and, upon every occasion, to 
follow that, and to make it the chief object of our 
attention ; to consider other things as trifling in com- 
parison with this, and yet, so far as we are able, not 
to neglect even these. We ought, for instance, to 
take care of our eyes; yet not as of the principal 
thing, but only on account of that which is principal ; 
because that can no otherwise preserve its own nature, 
than by making a due estimate of the rest, and pre- 
ferring some to others. What is the usual practice 
then? That of a traveller, who, returning into his 
own country, and meeting on the way with a good 
inn, being pleased with the inn, should remain there. 
Have you forgotten your intention,man? You were 
not travelling to this place, but only through it. 
“But this is a fine place.” And how many other 
fine inns are there, and how many pleasant fields, 
yet they are simply as a means of passage. What 
is the real business? To return to your country; to 
relieve the anxieties of your family; to perform the 
duties of a citizen; to marry, have children, and go 
through the public offices. For you did not travel 


182 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


in order to choose the finest places; but to return, 
to live in that where you were born, and of which 
you are appointed a citizen. 

Such is the present case. Because by speech and 
such instruction, we are to perfect our education, and 
purify our own will, and rectify that faculty which 
deals with things as they appear; and, because, for 
the statement of theorems, a certain diction, and some 
variety and subtilty of discourse are needful; many, 
captivated by these very things, one by diction, an- 
other by syllogisms, a third by convertible proposi- 
tions, just as our traveller was by the good inn, go 
no further ; but sit down and waste their lives shame- 
fully there, as if amongst the sirens. Your business, 
man, was to prepare yourself for such use of the 
semblances of things as nature demands ;_not to fail 
in what you seek, or incur what you shun; never 
to be disappointed or unfortunate, but free, unre- 
strained, uncompelled; conformed to the Divine Ad- 
ministration, obedient to that; finding fault with noth- 
ing; but able to say, from your whole soul, the verses 
which begin, 


« Conduct me, Zeus; and thou, O Destiny.” * 


While you have such a business before you, will 
you be so pleased with a pretty form of expression, or 
a few theorems, as to choose to stay and live with 
them, forgetful of your home; and say, “They are 
fine things!’”” Why, who says they are not fine 
things? But only as a means; as an inn. For 
what hinders one speaking like Demosthenes from 
being miserable? What hinders a logician equal to 
Chrysippus from being wretched, sorrowful, envious, 


* A Fragment of Cleanthes, quoted in full in Enchiridion, c. 52. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 188 


vexed, unhappy? Nothing. You see, then, that these 
are merely unimportant inns, and what concerns you 
is quite another thing. When I talk thus to some, 
they suppose that I am setting aside all care about 
eloquence, and about theorems; but I do not object 
to that; only the dwelling on these things inces- 
santly, and placing our hopes there. If any one, by 
maintaining this, hurts his hearers, place me amongst 
those hurtful people ; for I cannot, when I see one 
thing to be the principal and most excellent, call an- 
other so, to please you. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


CONCERNING A PERSON WHOM HE TREATED WITH 
DISREGARD. 


HEN a certain person said to him,“T have 

often come to you, with a desire of hearing 

you, and you have never given me any answer; but 

now, if possible, I entreat you to say something to 

me” ;—do you think, replied Epictetus, that, as in 

other things, so in speaking, there is an art, by which 

he, who understands it, speaks skilfully, and he, who 
does not, unskilfully ? 

“T do think sa.” 

He, then, who by speaking both benefits himself, 
and is able to benefit others, must speak skilfully ; 
but he who injures and is injured, must be unskilful 
in this art. For you may find some speakers injured, 
and others benefited. And are all hearers benefited 
by what they hear? Or will you find some benefited, 
and some hurt ? 


184 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


* Both.” : 

Then those who hear skilfully are benefited, and 
those who hear unskilfully, hurt. 

‘¢ Granted.” 

Is there any art of hearing, then, as well as of 
speaking ? 

“ Tt seems so.” 

If you please, consider it thus too. To whom think 
you that the practice of music belongs ? 

“ To a musician.” 

To whom the proper formation of a statue ? 

“To a sculptor.” 

And do you not imagine some art necessary even 
to view a statue skilfully ? 

“T do.” 

If, therefore, to speak properly belongs to one who 
is skilful, do you not see, that to hear profitably be- 
longs likewise to one who is skilful? For the present, 
however, if you please, let us say no more of doing 
things perfectly and profitably, since we are both far 
enough from anything of that kind ; but this seems to 
‘be universally confessed, that he, who would hear phi- 
losophers, needs some kind of exercise in hearing. Is 
it not so? Tell me, then, on what I shall speak to 
you? On what subject are you able to hear me? 

“On good and evil.” 

The good and evil of what? Ofa horse? 

“ No.” 

Of an ox? 

“ No.” 

What then, of a man? 

“Yes.” 

Do we know, then, what man is? What is his na- 
ture, what our idea of him, and how far our ears are 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 185 


open in this respect to him? Nay, do you under- 
stand what Nature is; or are you able, in any de- 
gree, to comprehend me, when I come to say, “ But 
I must use demonstration to you?” How should 
you? Do you comprehend what demonstration is, or 
how a thing is demonstrated, or by what methods ; 
or what resembles a demonstration, and yet is not a 
demonstration? Do you know what true or false is? 
What is consequent upon anything, and what contra- 
dictory ; suitable, or dissonant? But I must excite 
you to study philosophy. How shall I show you that 
contradiction, among the generality of mankind, by 
which they differ concerning good and evil, profitable 
and unprofitable, when you know not what contradic- 
tion means? Show me, then, what I shall gain, by 
discoursing with you? Excite an inclination in me, 
as a proper pasture excites an inclination to eating, 
in a sheep: for if you offer him a stone, or a piece of 
bread, he will not be excited. Thus we too have cer- 
tain natural inclinations to speaking, when the hearer 
appears to be somebody, when he gives us encourage- 
ment; but if he sits by, like a stone, or a tuft of grass, 
how can he excite any desire in a man? Does a vine 
say to an husbandman, “ Take care of me?” No; 
but invites him to take care of it, by showing him, 
that, if he does, it will reward him for his care. Who 
is there, whom bright and agreeable children do not 
attract to play, and creep, and prattle with them? 
But who was ever taken with an inclination to divert 
himself, or bray with an ass; for, be the creature 
ever so little, it is still a little ass. 

“‘ Why then do you say nothing to me?” 

I have only this to say to you; that whoever is ut- 
terly ignorant what he is, and wherefore he was born, 


186 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


and in what kind of a universe, and in what society ; 
what things are good, and what evil, what fair, and 
what base; who understands neither discourse, nor 
demonstration, nor what is true, nor what is false, 
nor is able to distinguish between them; such a one 
will neither exert his desires, nor aversions, nor pur- 
suits, conformably to Nature; he will neither aim, 
nor assent, nor deny, nor suspend his judgment, con- 
formably to Nature; but will wander up and down, 
entirely deaf and blind, supposing himself to be some- 
body, while he is nobody. Is there anything new in 
all this? Is not this ignorance the cause of all the 
errors that have happened, from the very origin of 
mankind? Why did Agamemnon and Achilles dif- 
fer? Was it not for want of knowing what is advan- 
tageous, what disadvantageous? Does not one of 
them say, it is advantageous to restore Chryseis to 
her father; the other, that it is not? Does not one 
say, that he ought to take away the prize of the 
other ; the other, that he ought not? Did they not, 
by these means, forget who they were, and for what 
purpose they had come there? Why, what did you 
come for, man; to win mistresses, or to fight? — 
“To fight.”— With whom; Trojans or Greeks ? — 
“With the Trojans.” — Leaving Hector, then, do 
you draw your sword upon your own king? And de 
you, good sir, forgetting the duties of a king, 


* Intrusted with a nation and its cares,” * 


go to squabbling, about a girl, with the bravest of 
your allies; whom you ought, by every method, to 
conciliate and preserve? And will you be inferior 
to a subtle priest, who pays his court anxiously to 


* Homer, Diad, II. 25. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 187 


you fine gladiators ?— You see the effects produced 
by ignorance of what is truly advantageous. 

“But I am rich, as well as other people.” — What, 
richer than Agamemnon ?— “But I am handsome 
too.”” — What, handsomer than Achilles ? —“ But I 
have fine hair too.”*— Had not Achilles finer and 
brighter? Yet he never combed it exquisitely, nor 
curled it. —‘“ But Iam strong too.””—Can you lift 
such a stone, then, as Hector or Ajax ?—“ But Iam 
of a noble family too.”—Is your mother a goddess, 
or your father descended from Zeus? And what 
good did all this do Achilles, when he sat crying 
for a girl ?—“ But I am an orator.” — And was not 
he? Do you not see how he treated the most elo- 
quent of the Greeks, Odysseus and Phenix? How 
he struck them dumb? This is all I have to say to 
you ; and even this against my inclination. 

“ Why so?” 

Because you have not excited me to it. For what 
can I see in you, to excite me, as spirited horses their 
riders? Your person? That you disfigure. Your 
dress? That is effeminate. Your behavior? Your 
look? Absolutely nothing. When you would hear 
a philosopher, do not say to him, “ You tell me noth- 
ing”; but only show yourself fit and worthy to hear ; 
and you will find how you will move him to speak. 


188 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER XXV. 
THAT LOGIC 18 NECESSARY. 


HEN one of the company said to him, “ Con- 

vince. me that logic is necessary,” — Would 

you have me, he said, demonstrate it to you? “ Yes.” 

Then I must use a demonstrative form of argument. 

“Granted.” And how will you know, then, whether 

I argue sophistically ? On this, the man being silent, 

You see, says he, that, even by your own confession, 

logic is necessary ; since without it, you cannot even 
learn whether it be necessary or not. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 
WHAT IS THE TEST OF ERROR. 


VERY error implies a contradiction ; for, since 
he who errs does not wish to err, but to be in 
the right, it is evident, that he acts contrary to his 
wish. What does a thief desire to attain? His own 
interest. If, then, thieving be really against his inter- 
“ est he acts contrary to his own desire. Now every ra- 
tional soul is naturally averse to self-contradiction ; 
but so long as any one is ignorant that it is a contra- 
diction, nothing restrains him from acting contradic- 
torily ; but, whenever he discovers it, he must as 
necessarily renounce and avoid it, as any one must 
dissent from a falsehood whenever he perceives it to 
be a falsehood; only while this does not appear, he 
assents to it as to a truth. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 189 


He, then, is gifted in speech, and excels at once in 
exhortation and conviction, who can disclose to each 
man the contradiction by which he errs, and prove 
clearly to him, that what he would he doth not; and 
what he would not, that he doth. For, if that be 
shown, he will depart from it of his own accord ; but, 
till you have shown it, be not surprised that he re- 
mains where he is; for he proceeds on the semblance 
of acting rightly. Hence Socrates, relying on this fac- 
ulty, used to say, “It is not my custom to cite any 
other witness for my assertions; but I am always 
contented with my opponent. I call and summon 
him for my witness ; and his single evidence serves 
instead of all others.” For he knew that, if a ra- 
tional soul be moved by anything, the scale must 
turn, whether it will or no. Show the governing fac- 
ulty of Reason a contradiction, and it will renounce 
it; but till you have shown it, rather blame yourself 
than him who remains unconvinced. 


BOOK III. 


CHAPTER I., 
OF PERSONAL ADORNMENT. 


CERTAIN young rhetorician coming to him 

with his hair too elaborately ornamented, and 
his dress very fine; tell me, said Epictetus, whether 
you do not think some horses and dogs beautiful ; 
and so of all other animals ? 

“T do.” 

Are some men, then, likewise beautiful, and others 
deformed ? 

“ Certainly.” 

Do we pronounce all these beautiful the same way 
then, or each. in some way peculiar to itself? You 
will judge of it by this ; since we see a dog naturally 
formed for one thing, a horse for another, and a 
nightingale, for instance, for another, therefore in 
general, it will be correct to pronounce each of them 
beautiful, so far as it is developed suitably to its own 
nature ; but, since the nature of each is different, I 
think each of them must be beautiful in a different 
way. Is it not so? 

“ Agreed.” 

Then what makes a dog beautiful makes a horse 
deformed ; and what makes a horse beautiful makes 
a dog deformed ; if their natures are different. 

“ So it seems.” 

For, I suppose, what makes a good Pancratiast * 


* These are the names of combatants in the Olympic games. A 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 191 


makes no good wrestler, and a very ridiculous racer ; 
and the very same person who appears well as a Pen- 
tathlete, might make a very ill figure in wrestling. 

“ Very true.” 

What, then, makes 2 man beautiful? Is jt on the 
same principle that a dog or a horse is beautiful ? 

“ The same.” 

What is it then, that makes a dog beautiful ? 

“ That excellence which belongs to a dog.” 

What a horse ? 

“ The excellence of a horse.” 

What aman? Must it not be the excellence be- 
longing toa man? If then you would appear bean- 
tiful, young man, strive for human excellence. 

« What is that?” 

Consider whom you praise, when unbiassed by par- 
tiality ; is it the honest or dishonest ? 

“The honest.” 

The sober, or the dissolute ? 

“ The sober.” 

The temperate, or the intemperate ? 

“The temperate.” 

Then, if you make yourself such a character, you 
know that you will make yourself beautiful; but, 
while you neglect these things, though you use every 
contrivance to appear beautiful, you must necessa- 
rily be deformed. 

I know not how to say anything further to you; 
for if I speak what I think, you will be vexed, and 
perhaps go away and return no more. And if I do 
not speak, consider what I am doing. You come to 


Pancratiast was one who united the exercises of wrestling and box- 
ing. A Pentathlete, one who contended on all the five games of leap- 
ing, running, throwing the discus, darting, and wrestling. — C. 


192 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


me to be improved, and I do not improve you; and 
you come to me as to a philosopher, and I do not 
speak like a philosopher. Besides, how could it be 
consistent with my duty towards yourself, to pass 
you by as incorrigible? If, hereafter, you should 
come to have sense, you will accuse me with rea- 
son: ‘ What did Epictetus observe in me, that, when 
he saw me come to him in such a shameful condition, 
he overlooked it, and never said so much as a word 
about it? Did he so absolutely despair of me? Was 
I not young? Was I not able to hear reason? How 
many young men, at that age, are guilty of many 
such errors? I am told of one Polemo, who, from 
a most dissolute youth, became totally changed.* 
Suppose he did not think I should become a Polemo, 
he might nevertheless have set my locks to rights, 
he might have stripped off my bracelets and rings, 
he might have prevented my depilating my person. 
But when he saw me dressed like a— what shall I 
say ?—he was silent.’ I do not say like what; 
when you come to your senses, you will say it 
yourself, and will know what it is, and who they 
are who adopt such a dress. 

If you should hereafter lay this to my charge, what 
excuse could I make? “Ay; but if I do speak, he 
will not regard me.” Why, did Laius regard Apollo? 
Did not he go and get intoxicated, and bid farewell to 
the oracle? What then? Did this hinder Apollo 
from telling him the truth? Now, I am uncertain, 
whether you will regard me, or not; but Apollo posi- 
tively knew, that Laius would not regard him, and 
yet he spoke.t And why did he speak? You may 


* By accidentally visiting the school of Kenocrates. — H. 
t Laius, king of Thebes, petitioned Apollo for ason. The oracle 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 193 


as well ask, why is he Apollo; why doth he deliver 
oracles ; why hath he placed himself in such a post 
as a prophet, and the fountain of truth, to whom the 
inhabitants of the world should resort? Why is kNow 
THYSELF inscribed on the front of his temple, when no 
one heeds it? 

Did Socrates prevail upon all who came to him, to 
take care of themselves? Not upon the thousandth 
part; but being, as he himself declares, divinely ap- 
pointed to such a post, he never deserted it. What 
said he even to his judges? “If you would acquit 
me, on condition that I should no longer act as I do 
now, I would not accept it, nor desist ; but I will ac- 
cost all I meet, whether young or old, and interrogate 
them in just the same manner; but particularly you, 
my fellow-citizens, since you are more nearly related 
to me.’ —“ Are you so curious and officious, Socra- 
tes? What isit to you, how we act?” — “ What say 
you? While you are of the same community and the 
same kindred with me, will you be careless of your- 
self, and show yourself a bad citizen to the city, a bad 
kinsman to your kindred, and a bad neighbor to your 
neighborhood ?’? —‘“‘ Why, who are you?” Here 
one ought nobly to say, “I am he who ought to take 
care of mankind.” For it is not every little paltry 
heifer that dares resist the lion; but if the bull 
should come up, and resist him, would you say to 
him, “ Who are you? What business is it of 
yours?’’ In every species, man, there is some one 
quality which by nature excels; in oxen, in dogs, 
in bees, in horses. Do not say to whatever excels, 
‘“‘Who are you?” If you do, it will,'somehow or 


answered him, that if Laius became a father, he should perish by the 
hand of his son. The prediction was fulfilled by Gadipus. — C. 
13 


194 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


other, find a voice to tell you; “I am like the purple 
thread in a garment. Do not expect me to be like 
the rest; nor find fault with my nature, which has 
distinguished me from others.” 

“What then, am I such a one? How should I 
be?” Indeed, are you such a one as to be able to 
hear the truth? I wish you were. But however, 
since I am condemned to wear a gray beard and a 
cloak, and you come to me as a philosopher, I will 
not treat you cruelly, nor as if I despaired of you; 
but will ask you, Who is it, young man, whom you 
would render beautiful? Know, first, who you are; 
and then adorn yourself accordingly. 

You are a human being; that is, a mortal animal, 
capable of a rational use of things as they appear. 
And what is this rational use? A perfect conformity 
to Nature. What have you, then, particularly excel- 
lent? Is it the animal part? No. The mortal? 
No. That which is capable of the mere use of these 
things? No. The excellence lies in the rational 
part. Adorn and beautify this; but leave your hair 
to Him who formed it as he thought good. 

Well; what other appellations have you? Are you 
aman, ora woman? Aman. Then adorn yourself 
as a man, not as a woman. A woman is naturally 
smooth and delicate; and, if hairy, is a monster, and 
shown among the monsters at Rome. It is the same 
thing in a man, not to be hairy; and, if he is by na- 
ture not so, he is a monster. But if he depilates 
himself, what shall we do with him? Where shall 
we show him; and how shall we advertise him? 
* A man to be seen, who would rather be a woman.” 
What a scandalous show! Who would not wonder at 
such an advertisement? I believe, indeed, that these 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 195 


very persons themselves would; not apprehending, 
that it is the very thing of which they are guilty. 

Of what have you to accuse your nature, sir, that 
it has made youa man? Why, were all to be born 
women then? In that case what would have been 
the use of your finery? For whom would you have 
made yourself fine, if all were women? But the 
whole affair displeases you. Go to work upon the 
whole then. Remove your manhood itself, and make 
yourself a woman entirely, that we may be no longer 
deceived, nor you be half man, half woman. To 
whom would you be agreeable? To the women? 
Be agreeable to them as a man. 

“ Ay; but they are pleased with fops.” 

Go hang yourself. Suppose they were pleased 
with every dcbauchery, would you consent? Is this 
your business in life? Were you born to please dis- 
solute women? Shall we make sucha one as you, 
in the Corinthian republic for instance, governor.of 
the city, master of the youth, commander of the 
army, or director of the public games? Will you 
pursue the same practices when you are married? 
For whom, and for what? ‘Will you be the father of 
children, and introduce them into the state, such as 
yourself? O what a fine citizen, and senator, and 
orator! Surely, young man, we ought to pray for a 
succession of young men disposed and bred like you! 

Now, when you have once heard this discourse, go 
home, and say to yourself, It is not Epictetus who 
has told me all these things, — for how should he ? — 
but some propitious God through him; for it would 
never have entered the head of Epictetus, who is not 
used to dispute with any one. Well; let us obey 
God then, that we may not incur the Divine displeas- 


196 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


ure. If a crow has signified anything to you by his 
croaking, it is not the crow that signifies it, but God, 
through him. And, if you have anything signified 
to you through the human voice, doth He not cause 
that man to tell it to you, that you may know the 
Divine power which acts thus variously, and signifies 
the greatest and principal things through the noblest 
messenger? What else does the poet mean, when 
he says, 
«Since we forewarned him, 


Sending forth Hermes, watchful Argicide, 
Neither to slay, — nor woo another’s wife.” * 


Hermes, descending from heaven, was to warn him; 
and the Gods now, likewise, send a Hermes the 
Argicide as messenger to warn you, not to invert 
the well-appointed order of things, nor be absorbed 
in fopperies; but suffer a man to be a man, and a 
woman to be a woman; a beautiful man, to be beau- 
tiful, as a man; a deformed man, to be deformed, as 
a man; for your personality lies not in flesh and 
hair, but in the Will. If you take care to have this 
beautiful, you will be beautiful. But all this while, 
I dare not tell you, that you are deformed; for I 
fancy you would rather hear anything than this. 
But consider what Socrates says to the most beauti- 
ful and blooming of all men, Alcibiades. ‘ Endeavor 
to make yourself beautiful.”” What does he mean 
to say tohim? “Curl your locks, and depilate your 
legs?” Heaven forbid! But rather, ‘“‘ Regulate your 
Will; throw away your wrong principles.” 

“What is to be done with the poor body then ?” 

Leave it to nature. Another hath taken care of 
such things. Give them up to Him. 


* Homer, Odyssey, I. 37. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 197 


‘¢ What, then, must one be a sloven?” 

By no means; but act in conformity to your na- 
ture. A man should care for his body, as a man; 
@ woman, as a woman; a child, as a child. If not, 
let us pick out the mane of a lion, that he may not 
be slovenly; and the comb of a cock, for he too 
should be tidy. Yes, but let it be as a cock; and 
a lion, as a lion; and a hound, as a hound. 


CHAPTER II. 


IN WHAT A WELL-TRAINED MAN SHOULD EXERCISE 
HIMSELF; AND THAT WE NEGLECT THE PRINCIPAL 
THINGS. 


HERE are three topics in philosophy, in which 
he who would be wise and good must be exer- 
cised. That of the desires and aversions, that he may 
not be disappointed of the one, nor incur the other. 
That of the pursuits and avoidances, and, in general, 
the duties of life; that he may act with order and 
consideration, and not carelessly. The third includes 
integrity of mind and prudence, and, in general, 
whatever belongs to the judgment. 

Of these points, the principal and most urgent is 
that which reaches the passions; for passion is pro- 
duced no otherwise than by a disappointment of one’s 
desires and an incurring of one’s aversions. Itis this 
which introduces perturbations, tumulis, misfortunes, 
and calamities ; this is the spring of sorrow, lamenta- 
tion, and envy ; this renders us envious and emulous, 
and incapable of hearing reason. 

The next topic regards the duties of life. For I 


198 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


am not to be undisturbed by passions, in the same 
sense as a statue is; but as one who preserves the 
natural and acquired relations ; as a pious person, as 
a son, as @ brother, as a father, as a citizen. 

The third topic belongs to those scholars who are 
now somewhat advanced; and is a security to the 
other two, that no bewildering semblance may sur- 
prise us, either in sleep, or wine, or in depression. 
This, say you, is beyond us. Yet our present philos- 
ophers, leaving the first and second topics, employ 
themselves wholly about the third; dealing in the 
logical subtilties. For they say that we must, by 
engaging in these subjects, take care to guard against 
deception. Who must? A wise and good man. Is 
this really, then, the thing you need? Have you mas- 
tered the other points? Are you not liable to be de- 
veived by money? When you see a fine girl, do you 
oppose the seductive influence? If your neighbor in- 
herits an estate, do you feel no vexation? Is it not 
steadfastness which you chiefly need? You learn 
even these very things, slave, with trembling, and a 
solicitous dread of contempt; and are inquisitive to 
know what is said of you. And if any one comes 
and tells you that, in a dispute as to which was the 
best of the philosophers, oné of the company named 
a certain person as the only philosopher, that little 
soul of yours grows to the size of two cubits instead 
of an inch. But if another comes and says, “ You 
are mistaken, he is not worth hearing ; for what does 
he know? He has the first rudiments, but nothing 
more’; you aré thunderstruck ; you presently turn 
pale, and cry out, “I will show what I am; that I 
am a great philosopher.” You exhibit by these very 
things what you are aiming to show in other ways. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 199 


Do not you know that Diogenes exhibited some soph- 
ist in this manner, by pointing with his middle fin- 
ger ;* and when the man was mad with rage, “ This,” 
said Diogenes, “‘is the very man;.1 have exhibited 
him to you.” For a man is not shown by the finger 
in the same sense as a stone, or a piece of wood, but 
whoever points out his principles, shows him as a 
‘man. 

Let us see your principles too. For is it not evi- 
dent that you consider your own Will as nothing: 
but are always aiming at something beyond its reach? 
As, what such a one will say of you, and what you 
shall be thought; whether a man of letters; whether 
to have read Chrysippus, or Antipater ; and if Arche- 
demus too, you have everything you wish. Why are 
you still solicitous, lest you should not show us what 
you are? Shall I tell you, what you have shown 
yourself? A mean, discontented, passionate, cow- 
ardly person; complaining of everything; accusing 
everybody ; perpetually restless; good for nothing. 
This you have shown us. Go now and read Arche- 
demus; and then, if you hear but the noise of a 
mouse, you are a dead man; for you will die some 
such kind of death as— Who was it? Orinis; + who 
valued himself extremely too, that he understood Ar- 
chedemus. 

Wretch, why do you not let alone things that do 
not belong to you? These things belong to such as 
are able to learn them without perturbation; who 
can say, “I am not subject to anger, or grief, or 


* Extending the middle finger, with the ancients, was a mark of 
the greatest contempt. — C. 

{ Crinis was a Stoic philosopher. The circumstances of his death 
are not now known. —C. 


200 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


envy. I am not restrained; I am not compelled. 
What remains for me todo? Iam at leisure; I am 
at ease. Let us now see how logical inversions are 
to be treated ; let us consider, when an hypothesis is 
laid down, how we may avoid a contradiction.” To 
such persons do these things belong. They who are 
safe may light a fire, go to dinner, if they please, and 
sing and dance ; but you are for spreading sail just 
when your ship is going down. 


CHAPTER III. 


WHAT IS THE CHIEF CONCERN OF A GOOD MAN; AND IN 
WHAT WE CHIEFLY OUGHT TO TRAIN OURSELVES. 


HE chief concern of a wise and good man is his 
own Reason. The body is the concern of a phy- 
sician, and of a gymnastic trainer; and the fields, of 
the husbandman. The business of a wise and good 
man is, to use the phenomena of existence, conform- 
ably to Nature. Now, every soul, as it is naturally 
formed for an assent to truth, a dissent from false- 
hood, and a suspense of judgment with regard to 
things uncertain; so it is moved by a desire of good, 
an aversion from evil, and an indifference to what is 
neither good nor evil. For, as a money-changer, or 
a gardener, is not at liberty to reject Cesar’s coin ; 
but when once it is shown, is obliged, whether he 
will or not, to deliver his wares in exchange for it; 
so is it with the soul. Apparent good at first sight 
attracts, and evil repels. Nor will the soul any more 
reject an evident appearance of good, than Cexsar’s 
coin. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 201 


Hence depends every movement, both of God and 
man; and hence good is preferred to every obliga- 
tion, however near. My connection is not with my 
father ; but with good. — Are you so hard-hearted ? — 
Such is my nature, and such is the coin which God 
hath given me. If therefore good is interpreted to 
be anything but what is fair and just, away go father, 
and brother, and country, and everything. What! 
Shall I overlook my own good, and give it up to 
you? For what? “I am your father.” But not 
my good. “Iam your brother.” But not my good. 
But, if we place it in a rightly trained Will, good must 
then consist in an observance of the several relations 
of life; and then, he who gives up mere externals, 
acquires good. Your father deprives you of your 
money; but he does not hurt you. He will possess 
more land than you, as much more as he pleases; 
but will he possess more honor? More fidelity ? 
More affection? Who can deprive you of this pos- 
session? Not even Zeus; for he did not will it so, 
since he has put this good into my own power, and 
given it me, like his own, uncompelled, unrestrained, 
and unhindered. But when any one deals in coin 
different from this, then whoever shows it to him, may 
have whatever is sold for it, in return. A thievish 
proconsul comes into the province. What coin does 
he use? Silver. Show it him, and carry off what 
you please. An adulterer comes. What coin does 
he use? Women. Take the coin, says one, and give 
me this trifle. “Give it me, and itis yours.” An- 
other is addicted to other debauchery; give him but 
his coin, and take what you please. Another is fond 
of hunting; give him a fine pony or puppy, and 
he will sell you for it what you will, though it be 


202 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


with sighs and groans. For there is that within 
which controls him, and assumes this to be current 
coin. 

In this manner ought every one chiefly to train 
himself. When you go out in the morning, examine 
whomsoever you see, or hear; and answer as if toa 
question. What have you seen? A handsome per- 
son? Apply the rule. Is this a thing controllable 
by Will, or uncontrollable? Uncontrollable. Then 
discard it. What have you seen? One in agony for 
the death ofa child. Apply the rule. Death is inev- 
itable. Banish this despair then. Has a consul met 
you? Apply the rule. What kind of thing is the 
consular office? Controllable by Will, or uncon- 
trollable ? Uncontrollable. Throw aside this too. 
It will not pass. Cast it away. It is nothing to you. 

If we acted thus, and practised in this manner 
from morning till night, by Heaven, something would 
be done. Whereas now, on the contrary, we are 
allured by every semblance, half asleep ; and, if we 
ever awake, it is only a little in the school; but 
as soon as we go out, if we meet any one grieving, 
we say, “He is undone.” Ifa consul, “ How happy 
ishe!” Ifan exile, “ How miserable.’ If a poor 
man, “ How wretched ; he has nothing to eat !”’ 

These miserable prejudices then are to be lopped 
off; and here is our whole strength to be applied. 
For what is weeping and groaning? Prejudice. 
What is misfortune? Prejudice. What is sedition, 
discord, complaint, accusation, impiety, levity? All 
these are prejudices, and nothing more; and preju- 
dices concerning things uncontrollable by Will, as if 
they could be either good or evil. Let any one 
transfer these convictions to things controllable by 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 208 


Will, and I will engage that he will preserve his 
constancy, whatever be the state of things about him. 

The soul is like a vase filled with water; while 
the semblances of things fall like rays upon its sur- 
face. If the water is moved, the ray will seem to 
be moved likewise, though it is in reality without 
motion. When, therefore, any one is seized with 
a giddiness in his head, it is not the arts and virtues 
that are bewildered, but the mind in which they lie ; 
when this recovers its composure, so will they like 
wise. 


CHAPTER IV. 


CONCERNING ONE WHO MADE HIMSELF IMPROPERLY 
CONSPICUOUS IN THE THEATRE. 


HEN the Governor of Epirus had exerted him- 

self with improper eagerness in favor of a 

comedian, and was upon that account publicly railed 

at; and, when he came to hear it, was highly dis- 

pleased with those who railed: at him; Why, what 

harm, said Epictetus, have these people done? They 
have shown favoritism ; which is just what you did. 

“Is this a proper manner then, of expressing their 
favor?” 

Seeing you, their governor, and the friend and 
vicegerent of Oxsar, express it thus, was it not to be 
expected that they would express it thus too? For, 
if this zealous favoritism is not right, do not show it 
yourself ; and if it is, why are you angry at them for 
imitating you? For whom have the many to imitate, 
but you, their superiors? From whom are they to 
take example, when they come into the theatre, but 


204 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


from you? ‘Do but look how Cesar’s vicegerent 
sees the play? Has he cried out? I will cry out 
too. Has he leaped up from his seat? I too will 
leap up from mine. Do his slaves sit in different 
parts of the house, making an uproar? I indeed 
have no slaves; but I will make as much uproar as 
I can unaided.” 

You ought to consider, then, that when you appear 
in the theatre, you appear as a rule and example to 
others, how they ought to see the play. Why is it 
that they have railed at you? Because every man 
hates what hinders him. They would have one actor 
crowned; you, another. They hindered you; and 
you them. You proved the stronger. They have 
done what they could; they have railed at the person 
who hindered them. What would you have, then? 
Would you do as you please, and not have them 
even talk as they please? Where is the wonder of 
all this? Does not the husbandman rail at Zeus 
when he is hindered by him? Does not the sailor? 
Do men ever cease railing at Cesar? What then, is 
Zeus ignorant of this? Are not the things that are 
said reported to Cesar? How then does he act? He 
knows that, if he were to punish all railers, he would 
have nobody left to command. 

When you enter the theatre, then, ought you to 
say, ‘Come, let Sophron be crowned?” No. But 
rather, ‘‘ Come, let me at this time regulate my Will 
in a manner conformable to Nature. No one is 
dearer to me than myself. It is ridiculous, then, 
that because another man gains the victory as a 
player, I should be hurt. Whom do I wish to gain 
the victory? Him who does gain it; and thus he 
will always be victorious whom I wish to be so.” — 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 205 


“ But I would have Sophron crowned.” — Why, cele- 
brate as many games as you will at your own house, 
Nemean, Pythian, Isthmian, Olympic, and proclaim 
him victor in all; but in public do not arrogate more 
than your due, nor seek to monopolize what belongs 
to all; or if otherwise, bear to be railed at, for if you 
act like the mob, you reduce yourself to an equality 
with them. 


CHAPTER V. 
CONCERNING THOSE WHO PLEAD SICKNESS. 


‘- AM sick here,” said one of the scholars. “T 
will return home.” 

Were you never sick at bome then? Consider 
whether you are doing anything here conducive to 
the regulation of your Will; for if you make no im- 
provement, it was to no purpose that you came. Go 
home then, and take care of your domestic affairs. 
For if your Reason cannot be brought into conformity 
to nature, your land may. You may increase your 
money, support the old age of your father, mix in 
the public assemblies, and rule as badly as you have 
lived, and do other such things. But if you are con- 
scious to yourself that you are casting off some of 
your wrong principles, and taking up different ones 
in their room, and that you have transferred your 
scheme of life from things not controllable by will to 
those controllable; and that if you do sometimes cry 
alas, itis not for what concerns your father, or your 
brother, but yourself; why do you any longer plead 
sickness? Do not you know that both sickness and 
death must overtake us’ At what employment? 


206 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


The husbandman at his plough; the sailor on his 
voyage. At what employment would you be taken? 
For, indeed, at what employment ought you to be ta- 
ken? If there is any better employment at which you 
can be taken, follow that. For my own part, I would 
be found engaged in nothing but in the regulation of 
my own Will; how to render it undisturbed, unre- 
strained, uncompelled, free. I would be found study- 
ing this, that I may be able to say to God, “‘ Have I 
transgressed Thy commands? Have I perverted the 
powers, the senses, the instincts, which Thou hast 
given me? Havel ever accused Thee, or censured 
Thy dispensations? I have been sick, because it was 
Thy pleasure, like others; but I willingly. I have 
been poor, it being Thy will; but with joy. I have 
not been in power, because it was not Thy will; and 
power I have never desired. Hast Thou ever seen 
me saddened because of this? Have I not always 
approached Thee with a cheerful countenance; pre- 
pared to execute Thy commands and the indications 
of Thy will? Is it Thy pleasure that I should de- 
part from this assembly? Idepart. I give Thee all 
thanks that Thou hast thought me worthy to have a 
share in it with Thee; to behold Thy works, and to 
join with Thee in comprehending Thy administra- 
tion.” Let death overtake me while I am thinking, 
while I am writing, while I am reading such things 
as these. 

“ But I shall not have my mother to hold my head 
when I am sick.” 

Get home then to your mother; for you are most 
fit to have your head held when you are sick. 

“ But I used at home to lie on a fine couch.” 

Get to this couch of yours; for you are fit to lie 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 207 


upon such a one, even in health; so do not miss 
doing that for which you are qualified. But what 
says Socrates? “ As one man rejoices in the improve- 
ment of his estate, another of his horse, so do I daily 
rejoice in perceiving myself to grow better.” * 

“In what? In pretty speeches? ”’ 

Use courteous words, man. 

“In trifling theorems? What do they signify ? 
Yet, indeed, I do not see that the philosophers are 
employed in anything else.” 

Do you think it nothing, to accuse and censure 
no one, God nor man? Always to carry abroad 
and bring home the same countenance? These were 
the things which Socrates knew; and yet he never 
professed to know, or to teach anything; but if any 
one wanted pretty speeches, or little theorems, he 
brought him to Protagoras, to Hippias; just as, if 
any one had come for potherbs, he would have taken 
him to a gardener. Which of you, then, earnestly 
sets his heart on this? If you had, you would bear 
sickness and hunger and death with cheerfulness. 
If any one of you has truly loved, he knows that I 
speak truth. 


CHAPTER VI. 
MISCELLANEOUS. 


HEN he was asked, how it came to pass, that 
though the art of reasoning might be now 

more studied, yet the improvements made were for- 
merly greater? In what instance, answered he, is it 
now more studied; and in what were the improve- 


* Xenophon, Mem. I. 6.—H. 


208 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


ments greater? For in what now is most studied, 
in that will be found likewise the improvements. 
The present study is the solution of syllogisms, and 
in this improvements are made. But formerly the 
study was to harmonize the Reason with Nature; 
and improvement was made in that. Therefore do 
not confound things, nor, when you study one thing, 
expect improvement in another ; but see whether any 
one of us, who applies himself to think and act con- 
formably to Nature, ever fails of improvement. De- 
pend upon it, you will not find one. 

A good man is invincible; for he does not contend 
where he is not superior. If you would have his 
land, take it; take his servants, take his office, take 
his body. But you will never frustrate his desire, 
nor make him incur his aversion. He engages in no 
combat hut what concerns objects within his own 
control. How then can he fail to be invincible ? 

Being asked, what common sense was, he an- 
swered: As that may be called a common ear which 
distinguishes only sounds, but that which distinguishes 
notes, an artistic one; so there are some things which 
men, not totally perverted, discern by their common 
natural powers; and such a disposition is called com- 
mon sense. 

It is not easy to gain the attention of effeminate 
young men,—for you cannot take up custard by a 
hook,— but the ingenuous, even if you discourage 
them, are the more eager for learning. Hence Ru- 
fus, for the most part, did discourage them; and 
made use of that as a criterion of the ingenuous and 
disingenuous. For, he used to say, as a stone, even 
if you throw it up, will, by its own propensity be car- 
ried downward, so an ingenuous mind, the more it is 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 209 


forced from its natural bent, will incline towards it 
the more strongly. 


CHAPTER VII. 


CONCERNING A CERTAIN GOVERNOR WHO WAS AN 
EPICUREAN. 


HEN the Governor, who was an Epicurean, 
came to him; “It is fit,” said he, “that we 
ignorant people should inquire of you philosophers 
what is the most valuable thing in the world; as 
those who come into a strange city do of the citizens, 
and such as are acquainted with it; that, after this 
inquiry, we may go and take a view of it, as they do 
in cities. Now, almost every one admits that there 
are three things belonging to man, — soul, body, and 
externals. It belongs to such as you to answer which 
is the best. What shall we tell mankind? Is it the 
flesh ?”’ 

And was it for this that Maximus took a voyage in 
winter as far as Cassiope to accompany his son? Was 
it to gratify the flesh? 

“No, surely.” 

Is it not fit, then, to study what is best? 

“Yes, beyond all other things.” 

What have we, then, better than flesh? 

“The soul.” 

Are we to prefer the good of the better, or of the 
-worse ? 

“ Of the better.” 

Does the good of the soul consist in things control- 


lable by Will, or uncontrollable ? 
M4 


210 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


-“Tn things controllable.” 

Does the pleasure of the soul then depend on the 
Will? 

“Tt does.” 

And whence does this pleasure arise? From it- 
self? This is unintellipible. For there must exist 
some principal essence of good, in the attainment 
of which, we shall enjoy this pleasure of the soul. 

“This too is granted.” 

In what then consists this pleasure of the.soul? If 
it be in mental objects, the essence of good is found. 
For it is impossible that good should lie in one thing, 
and rational enjoyment in another; or that, if the 
eanise is not good, the effect should be good. For, to 
make the effect reasonable, the cause must he good. 
But this you cannot reasonably allow; for it would 
be to contradict both Epicurus and the rest of your 
principles. It remains then, that the pleasures of 
the soul must consist in bodily objects; and that 
there must be the cause and the essence of good. 
Maximus, therefore, did foolishly, if he took a voy- 
age for the sake of ‘anything but his body; that is, 
for the sake of what is best. A man does foolishly, 
too, if he refrains from what is another’s, when he is 
a judge and able to takeit. We should consider only 
this, if you please, how it may be done secretly and 
safely, and so that no one miay know it. For Epicu- 
rus himself ‘does not pronounce ‘stealing to be evil, 
only the being found out in it; and prohibits it for 
no other reason, but because it‘is impossible to insure 
ourselves against discovery. But I say to you that, 
if it be done dexterously and cautiously, we shall not 
be discovered. Besides we have powerful friends of 
both sexes at Rome; and the Greeks are weak; and 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 21k 


nobody will dare te go up to Rome on such an affair. 
Why do you refrain from your own proper good? 
Tt is madness ; it is folly. But if you were to tell me 
that you do refrain, I would not believe you, For, ag 
itis impossible to assent ta an apparent falsehood, or to. 
deny an appareat truth, so it is impossible to abstain, 
from an apparent good. Now, riches are a good; 
and, indeed, the chief instrument of pleasures. Why 
do not you acquire them? And why do not we cor- 
rapt the wife ef our neighbor, if it can be done ser 
cretly? And if the husband should happen to be 
impertinent, why not cut his throat too, if you hare 
a mind to be such a philosopher as you ought to be, a 
complete one, —- to. be consistent with your own prin- 
ciples. Otherwise you will not differ from us who 
are called Stoics. For we, too, say one thing and do 
another; we talk well and act ill; but you will be 
perverse in a contrary way, teaching bad principles, 
and acting well. 

For Heaven’s sake represent to yourself a city of 
Epicureans. “Ido not marry.” “Nor. For we 
are not to marry nor have children; nor to engage 
in public affairs.’ What will be the consequence of 
this? Whence are the citizens to come? Who will 
educate them? ‘Who will be the governor of the 
youth? Who the master of their exercises? Who 
then will he teach them? ‘Will it be what used to be 
taught at Athens, or Lacedemon? Take a young 
man; bring him up according to your pringiples. 
These principles are wicked, subversive of a gtate, 
pernicious to families, nor hecoming even to women, 
Give them up, sir. You live in a capital city. You 
are to govern and judge uprightly, and to refrain 
from what belongs to others, No one’s wife or child, 


212 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


or silver or gold plate, is to have any charms for you, 
except your own. Provide yourself with principles 
consonant to these truths; and, setting out thence, 
you will with pleasure refrain from things so persua- 
sive to mislead and conquer. But, if to their own 
persuasive force, we can add such a philosophy as 
hurries us upon them, and confirms us in them, what 
will be the consequence ? 

In a sculptured vase, which is the best; the silver, 
or the workmanship? In the hand the substance is 
flesh; but its operations are the principal thing. 
Accordingly, its functions are threefold; relating to 
its existence, to the manner of its existence, and to its 
principal operations. Thus, likewise, do not set a 
‘value on the mere materials of man, the flesh; but on 
the principal operations which belong to him. 

* What are these?” 

Engaging in public business, marrying, the pro- 
duction of children, the worship of God, the care of 
parents, and, in general, the regulation of our desires 
and aversions, our pursuits and avoidances, in accord- 
ance with our nature. 

“ What is our nature?” 

To be free, noble spirited, modest. For what other 
animal blushes? What other has the idea of shame ? 
But pleasure must be subjected to these, as an attend- 
ant and handmaid, to call forth our activity, and to 
keep us constant in natural operations. 

“ But I am rich.and want nothing.” 

Then why do you pretend to philosophize? Your 
gold and silver plate is enough for you. What need 
have you of principles? 

“ Besides, I am Judge of the Greeks.” 

Do you know how to judge? Who has imparted 
this knowledge to you? 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 218 


“ Cesar has given me a commission.” 

Let him give you a commission to judge of music; 
what good will it do you? But how were you made 
a Judge? Whose hand have you kissed? That of 
Symphorus, or Numenius? Before whose door have 
you slept? To whom have you sent presents? After 
all, do you not perceive that the office of Judge puts 
you in the same rank with Numenius ? 

“ But I can throw whom I please into a prison.” 

So you may a stone. 

“ But I can beat whom I will too.” 

So you may an ass. This is not a government over 
men. Govern us like reasonable creatures. Show 
us what is best for us, and we will pursue it; show 
us what is otherwise, and we will avoid it. Like Soc- 
rates, make us imitators of yourself. He was prop- 
erly a governor of men, who controlled their desires 
and aversions, their pursuits, their avoidances. “Do 
this; do not that, or I will throw you into prison.” 
This is not a government for reasonable creatures. 
But “Do as Zeus hath Commande) or you will ‘be 
punished, and be a loser.” 

“What shall I lose?” 

Simply your own right settint your fidelity, hon- 
or, decency. You can find no losses greater than 
these. 


214 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


HOW WE ARE TO EXERCISE OURSELVES AGAINST THE 
SEMBLANCES OF THINGS. 


N the samé manner as we exercise ourselves against 

sophistical questions, wé should exercise ourselves 
likewise in relation to suth semblances as every day 
occur; for these, too, offer questions to us. Such a 
one’s son is dead. What think you of it? Answer; 
it is a thing inevitable, and therefore not an evil. 
Such a one is disinherited by his father. What think 
you of it? It is inevitable, and so notanevil, Ozsar 
has condemned him. This is inevitable, and so not 
an evil. He has been ‘afflicted by it. This is control- 
Yable by Will; it is an evil. He has supported it 
bravely. ‘This is within the control of Will; it isa 
good. 

Tf we train outselves in this manner ‘we shall make 
improvement; for we shall never assent to anything 
but what the semblance itself includes. A son is 
dead. What then? A son is dead. Nothing more? 
Nothing. A ship is lost. What then? A ship is 
Yost. He is carried to prison. What then? He is 
carried to prison. That he is unhappy isan addition 
that every one must make for himself. “ But Zeus 
does not order these things rightly.” Why so. Be 
cause he has made you to be patient? Because he 
has made you to be brave? Because he has made 
them to be no evils? Because it is permitted you, 
while you suffer them, to be happy? Because he has 
opened you the door whenever they do not suit you? 
Go out, man, and do not complain ! 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 215 


If you would know how the Romans treat, philoso- 
phers, hear. Jtalicus, esteemed one of the greatest 
philosophers among them, being in a passion with his 
own people, when I was by, said, as if he had suffered 
some intolerable evil, “I cannot bear it; you are the 
ruin of me; you will make me just like him” ; point- 
ing to me. 


CHAPTER IX, 


CONCERNING A CERTAIN ORATOR, WHO WAS GOING TO 
ROME ON A LAWSUIT. 


PERSON came to him who was going to Rome 
4% ona lawsuit in which his dignity was concerned ; 
and, after telling him the occasion of his journey, 
asked him what he thought of the affair? If you ask 
me, says Epictetus, what will happen to you at Rome, 
and whether you shall gain or lose your cause, I have 
no suggestion as to that. But if you ask me, how 
you shall fare; I can answer, Jf you have right prin- 
ciples, well; if wrong ones, ill. For every action 
turas upon its principle, What was the reason that 
you so earnestly desired to be chosen Governor of the 
Gnossians? Principle. What is the reason that you 
are now going to Rome? Principle. And in winter 
too; and with danger, and expense? Why, because 
it is necessary. Whattells you so? Your principle. 
If, then, principles are the source of all our actions, 
wherever any one has bad principles the effeet will 
correspond to the cause. Well then; are al] our 
principles sound? Are both yours and your antago- 
nist’s ? How then do you differ? Or are yours better 
than his? Why? You think so; and so thinks he 


‘ 


216 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


of his; andsodo madmen. This is a bad criterion. 
But show me that you have given some attention and 
care to your principles. As you now take a voyage 
to Rome for the government of the Gnossians, and 
are not contented to stay at home with the honors 
you before enjoyed, but desire something greater and 
more illustrious; did you ever take such a voyage 
in order to examine your own principles, and to throw 
away the had ones, if you happened to have any? 
Did you ever apply to any one upon this account? 
What time did you ever appoint to yourself for 
it? Whatage? Run over your years. If you are 
ashamed of me, do it for yourself. Did you examine 
your principles when you were a child? Did not you 
act then as now? When you were a youth, and fre- 
quented the schools of the orators, and yourself made 
declamations, did you ever imagine that you were 
deficient in anything? And when you became a man, 
and entered upon public husiness, pleaded causes, 
and acquired credit, whom did you then recognize as 
your equal? How would you have borne that any 
one should examine whether your principles were 
bad? What, then, would you have me say to you? 

“ Assist me in this affair.” 

I have no suggestion to offer for that. Neither 
are you come to me, if it be upon that account you 
came, as to a philosopher ; but as you would come to 
an herb-seller or a shoemaker. 

“For what purposes, then, can the philosophers 
give suggestions ?”” 

For preserving and conducting the Reason con- 
formably to Nature, whatever happens. Do you think 
this a small thing? 

“No; but the greatest.” 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPIOCTETUS. 217 


Well; and does it require but a short time? and 
may it be taken as you pass by? If you can, take it 
then; and so you will say, “I have visited Epicte- 
tus.” Ay; just as you would visit a stone or a 
statue. For you have seen me, and nothing more. 
But he visits a man, as a man, who learns his prin-. 
ciples; ahd, in return, shows his own. Learn my 
principles. Show me yours. Then say you have 
visited me. Let us confute each other. If I have 
any bad principle, take it away. If you have any, 
bring it forth. This is visiting a philosopher. No; 
but “It lies in our way; and, while we are about 
hiring a ship, we may call on Epictetus. Let us see 
what he says.’”’ And then when you are gone, you 
say “ Epictetus is nothing. His language was inaccu- 
rate, was barbarous.” For what else did you come 
to criticise? “ Well; but if I employ myself in these 
things, I shall be without an estate, like you; with- 
out plate, without equipage, like you.” Nothing, 
perhaps, is necessary to be said to this, but that I do 
not want them. But, if you possess many things, you 
still want others ; so that whether you will or not, 
you are poorer than I. 

“‘ What then do I need?” 

What you have not; constancy; a mind conform- 
able to Nature ; and a freedom from perturbation. 
Patron, or no patron, what careI? But you do. I 
am richer than you. J am not anxious what Cesar 
will think of me. I flatter no one on that account. 
This I have, instead of silver and gold plate. You 
have your vessels of gold; but your discourse, your 
principles, your opinions, your pursuits, your desires, 
are of mere earthen ware. When I have all these 
conformable to Nature, why should not I bestow 


218 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


some study upon my reasoning too? I am at leisure. 
My mind is under no distraction. In this freedom 
from distraction, what shall I do? Have I anything 
more becoming a man than this? You, when you 
have nothing to do, are restless; you go to the thea- 
tre, or perhaps to bathe. Why should not the phi- 
losopher polish his reasoning? You have fine crystal 
and myrrhine vases ;* I have acute forms of argu- 
ing. To you, all you have appears little; to me all 
I have seems great. Your appetite is insatiable; 
mine is satisfied. When children thrust their hand 
into a narrow jar of nuts and figs, if they fill it, they 
cannot get it out again; then they begin crying. 
Drop a few of them, and you will get out the rest. 
And do you too drop your desire; do not demand 
much, and you will attain. 


CHAPTER X. 
IN WHAT MANNER WE OUGHT TO BEAR SICKNESS. 


E should have all our principles ready for use 

on every occasion. At dinner, such as relate 

to dinner ; in the bath, such as relate to the bath; in 
the bed, such as relate to the bed. 


«Let not the stealing god of sleep surprise, 
Nor creep in slumbers on thy weary eyes, 


* « And how they quaff in gold, 
Crystal and myrrhine cups, imbossed with gems.” 
Paradise Regained, IV. 181. 


Myrrhine cups were probably a kind of agate described by Pliny, 
which, when burnt, had the smell of myrrh. See Teatro Critico, 
Tom. 6, disc. 4, § 6.—C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 219 


Ere every action of the former day 

Strictly thou dost, and righteously survey, 

What have I done? In what have I transgressed ? 
What good, or ill, has this day’s life expressed ? 
Where have [ failed, in what I ought to do? 

If evil were thy deeds, repent and mourn, 

If good, rejoice.” * 

We should retain these verses so as to apply them 
to our use; not merely to say them by rote, as we 
do with verses in honor of Apollo. 

Again; in a fever, we should have such principles 
ready as relate to a fever; and not, as soon as we 
‘re taken ill, forget all. Previded I do but act like 
a philosopher, let what will happen. Some way or 
‘other depart I must from this frail body, whether a 
fever comes or not. What is it to be a philosopher ? 
Is it not to be prepared against events? Do you not 
comprehend that you then say, in effect, “If I am but 
prepared to bear all events with calmness, let what 
will happen ”’; otherwise, you are like an athlete, 
who, after receiving a blow, should quit the combat. 
In that case, indeed, you might leave off without a 
penalty. But what shall we get by leaving off phi- 
Yosophy ? 

What, then, ought each of us to say upon every dif- 
ficult occasion? “It was for this that I exercised ; 
it was for this that I trained myself.” God says to 
you, give me a proof if you have gone through the 
preparatory combats according to rule; if you have 
followed a proper diet and proper exercise; if you 
have obeyed your master ;— and, after this, do you 
faint at the very time of action ? 

* Pythagoras, Golden Verses, 40-44. This is Rowe’s translation, 
as quoted by Mrs. Carter, hut not precisely as given in Dacier’s Py- 
thagoras (London, 1707), p. 165.— H. 


220 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Now is your time for a fever. Bear it well. For 
thirst ; bear it well. For hunger; bear it well. Is it 
notin your power? Whoshall restrain you? <A phy- 
sician may restrain you from drinking ; but he cannot 
restrain you from bearing your thirst well. He may 
restrain you from eating ; but he cannot restrain you 
from bearing hunger well. “ But I cannot follow my 
studies.” And for what end do you follow them, 
slave? Is it not that you may be prosperous? That 
you may be constant? that you may think and act 
conformably to Nature? What restrains you, but 
that, in a fever, you may keep your Reason in har- 
mony with Nature? Here is the test of the matter. 
Here is the trial of the philosopher ; for a fever is a 
part of life, as is a walk, a voyage, or a journey. Do 
you read when you are walking? No; nor ina fever. 
But when you walk well, you attend to what belongs 
to a walker; so, if you bear a fever well, you have 
everything belonging to one in a fever. Whatis it to 
bear a fever well? Not to blame either God or man; 
not to be afflicted at what happens ; to await death in 
a right and becoming manner; and to do what is to 
be done. When the physician enters, not to dread 
what he may say ; nor, if he should tell you that you 
are doing well, to be too much rejoiced ; for what good 
has he told you? When you were in health, what 
good did it do you? Not to be dejected when he tells 
you that you are very ill; for what is it to be very ill? 
To be near the separation of soul and body. What 
harm is there in this, then? If you are not near it 
now, will you not be near it hereafter? What, will 
the world be quite overturned when you die? Why, 
then, do you flatter your physician? Why do you 
say, “If you please, sir, I shall do well”? Why 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 221 


do you furnish an occasion to his pride? Why do 
not you treat a physician, with regard to an insignif- 
icant body, which is not yours, but by nature mor- 
tal,— as you do a shoemaker about your foot, or a 
carpenter about a house? It is the season for these 
things, to one in a fever. If he fulfils these, he has 
what belongs to him. For it is not the business of a 
philosopher to take care of these mere externals, of his 
wine, his oil, or his body ; but of his Reason. And 
how with regard to externals? Not to behave incon- 
siderately about them. 

What occasion is there, then, for’ fear? What 
occasion for anger, for desire, about things that be- 
long to others, or are of no value? For two rules we 
should always have ready, — that there is nothing good 
or evil save in the Will; and that we are not to lead 
events, but to follow them. “My brother ought not to 
have treated me so.” Very true; but he must see 
to that. However he treats me, J am to act rightly 
with regard to him; for the one is my own concern, 
the other is not; the one cannot be restrained, the 
other may. 


CHAPTER XI. 
MISCELLANEOUS. 


HERE are some punishments appointed, as by a 

law, for such as disobey the Divine administra- 
tion. Whoever shall esteem anything good, except 
what depends on the Will, let him envy, let him 
covet, let him flatter, let him be full of perturbation. 
Whoever esteems anything else to be evil, let him 
grieve, let him mourn, let him lament, let him be 


222 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


wretched. And yet, though thus severely punished, 
we cannot desist. 
Remember what the poet says, of a guest. 


“It were not lawful to affront a guest, 
Even did the worst draw nigh.” * 


This, too, you should be prepared to say with re- 
gard to a father, It is not lawful for me to affront 
you, father, even if a worse than you had come; for 
all are from paternal Zeus. And so of a brother; 
for all are from kindred Zeus. And thus we shall 
find Zeus to be the superintendent of all the other 
relations. 


CHAPTER XII... 
OF TRAINING. 


7 E are not to carry our training beyond Nature 
and Reason; for thus we, who call ourselves 
philosophers, shall not differ from jugglers. For it is 
no doubt difficult to walk upon a rope; and not only 
difficult, but dangerous. Ought we too, for that rea- 
son, to make it our study io walk upon a rope, or 
balance a pole,f or grasp a statue? { By no means. 
it is not everything difficult or dangerous that is a 


* ‘Homer, Odyssey, XIV. 54.— H. 

+ A phrase occurs here, which has greatly puzzled the commenta- 
tors, but which-evidently refers to the gymnastic exercise known ag 
the “perche-pole,” where a pole is balanced by one performer and 
ascended by another. — H. 

t Diogenes used, in winter, to grasp statues, when they were cov- 
ered with snow, as an exercise, to inure himsélf to hardship. D1o- 
ENES Laurriys. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 223: 


proper training; but such things as are conducive 
to what lies before us to do. 

* And what is it that lies before us to do?” 

To have our desires and aversions free from re- 
straint. 

“ How is that ?” 

Not to be disappointed of our desire, nor incur our 
aversion. To this ought our training to be directed. 
For, without vigorous and steady training, it is not 
possible to preserve our desire undisappointed and 
our aversion unineurred ; and, therefore, if we suffer 
it to be externally employed on things uncontrollable 
by Will, be assured that your desire will neither gain 
its object, nor your aversion avoid it. 

' And because habit has a powerful influence, and 
we are habituated to apply our desire and aversion 
to externals only, we must oppese one habit to an- 
other; and where the semblances are most treacher- 
ous, there oppose the force of training. I am inclined 
to pleasure. I will bend myself, even unduly, to the 
other side, as a matter of training. I am averse to 
pain. I will strive and wrestle with these semblances, 
that I may cease to shrink from any such object. For 
who is truly in training? He who endeavors totally 
to control desire, and to apply aversion only to things 
controllable by Will, and strives for it most in the 
most difficult cases. Hence different persons are to 
be trained in different ways. What signifies it, to this 
purpose, to balance a pole, or to go about with tent 
and implements [of exhibition]? Ifyou are hasty, 
man, let it be your training to bear ill language 
patiently ; and, when you are affronted, not to be 
angry. Thus, at length, you may arrive at such a 
proficiency as, when any one strikes you, to say to 


224 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


yourself, ‘Let me suppose this to be like grasping a 
statue.” Next, train yourself to make but a moder- 
ate use of wine, — not to drink a great deal, to which 
some are so foolish as to train themselves,— but to 
abstain from this first; and then to abstain from 
women and from gluttony. Afterwards you will ven- 
ture into the lists at some proper season, by way of 
trial, if at all, to see whether these semblances get 
the better of you, as much as they used todo. But, 
at first, fly from what is stronger than you. The con- 
test between a fascinating woman and a young man 
just initiated into philosophy is unequal. The brass 
pot and the earthen pitcher, as the fable says, are an 
unfair match. 

Next to the desires and aversions, is the second 
class, of the pursuits and avoidances; that they may 
be obedient to reason ; that nothing may be done im- 
properly, in point of time and place, or in any other 
respect. 

The third class relates to the faculty of assent and 
to what is plausible and persuasive. As Socrates 
said, that we are not to lead a life, which is not 
tested, so neither are we to admit an untested sem- 
blance; but to say, “‘ Stop; let me see what you are, 
and whence you come,” just as the police say, ‘“ Show 
me your pass.” ‘ Have you that indorsement from 
Nature which is necessary to the acceptance of every 
semblance ?”’ 

In short, whatever things are applied to the body 
by those who train it, so may these be used in our 
training if they any way affect desire or aversion. 
But if this be done for mere ostentation, it belongs 
to one who looks and seeks for something external, 
and strives for spectators to exclaim, “ What a great 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 225 


man!” Hence Apollonius said well, “If you have 
a mind to train yourself for your own benefit, when 
you are choking with heat, take a little cold water in 
your mouth, and spit it out again, and hold your 
tongue.” 


CHAPTER XIII. 
WHAT SOLITUDE IS; AND WHAT A SOLITARY PERSON. 


T is solitude to be in the condition of a helpless 
person. For he who is alone is not therefore sol- 
itary, any more than one in a crowd is the contrary. 
‘When, therefore, we lose a son, or a brother, or a 
friend, on whom we have been used to: repose, we 
often say we are left solitary, even in the midst of 
Rome, where such a crowd is continually meeting 
us; where we live among so many, and where we 
have, perhaps, a numerous train of servants. For he 
is understood to be solitary who. is helpless, and ex- 
posed to such as would injure him. Hence, in a 
journey especially, we call ourselves solitary when we 
fall among thieves; for it is not the sight of a man 
that removes our solitude, but of an honest man, a 
man of honor, and a helpful companion. If merely 
being alone is sufficient for solitude, Zeus may be 
said to be solitary at the great conflagration,* and 
bewail himself that he hath neither Here, nor Athene, 
nor Apollo, nor brother, nor son, nor descendant, nor 
relation. This, some indeed say, he doth when he is 
alone at the conflagration. Such as these, moved by 
some natural principle, some natural desire of soci- 


* The Stoics held to successive conflagrations at destined periods ; 
in which all beings were reabsorbed into the Deity. —C. 
15 


226 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


ety, and mutual love, and by the pleasure of conver- 
sation, do not rightly consider the state of a person 
who is alone. But none the less should we be pre- 
pared for this also, to suffice unto ourselves, and to 
bear our own company. For as Zeus converses with 
himself, acquiesces in himself, and contemplates his 
own administration, and is employed in thoughts 
worthy of himself; so should we too be able to talk 
with ourselves, and not to need the conversation of 
others, nor suffer ennui; to attend to the divine ad- 
ministration; to consider our relation to other be- 
ings; how we have formerly been affected by events, 
how we are affected now; what are the things that 
still press upon us; how these too may be cured, how 
removed; if anything wants completing, to complete 
it according to reason. You perceive that Cesar has 
procured us a profound peace ; there are neither wars 
nor battles, nor great robberies nor piracies; but we 
may travel at all hours, and sail from east to west. 
But can Cesar procure us peace from a fever too? 
From a shipwreck? From a fire? From an earth- 
quake? From a thunder storm? Nay, even from 
love? He cannot. From grief? From envy? No; 
not from any one of these. But the doctrine of phi- 
losophers promises to procure us peace from these too. 
And what doth it say? “If you will attend to me, 
O mortals! wherever you are, and whatever you are 
doing, you shall neither grieve, nor be angry, nor be 
compelled, nor restrained ; but you shall live serene, 
and free from all.” Shall not he who enjoys this 
peace proclaimed, not by Casar (for how should he 
have it to proclaim?) but by God, through Reason, 
—be contented when he is alone, reflecting and 
considering: “To me there can now no ill happen; 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 227 


there is no thief, no earthquake. All is full of peace, 
all full of tranquillity ; every road, every city, every 
assembly, neighbor, companion, is powerless to hurt 
me.” Another whose care it is, provides you with 
food, with clothes, with senses, with ideas. When- 
ever He doth not provide what is necessary, He 
sounds a retreat; He opens the. door, and says to 
you, “Come.” Whither? To nothing dreadful ; 
but to that whence you were made; to what is 
friendly and congenial, to the elements. What in 
you was fire gues away to fire; what was earth, 
to earth; what air, to air; what water, to water. 
There is no Hades, nor Acheron, nor Cocytus, nor 
Pyriphlegethon ; but all is full of gods and divine 
beings. He who can have such thoughts, and can 
look upon the sun, moon, and stars, and enjoy the 
earth and sea, is no more solitary than he is helpless. 
“Well; but suppose any one should come and mur- 
der me when Iam alone.” Foolish man; not you; 
but that insignificant body of yours. 

What solitude is there then left? What destitu- 
tion? Why do we make ourselves worse than chil- 
dren? What do they do when they are left alone? 
They take up shells and dust; they build houses, 
then pull them down; then build something else; 
and thus never want amusement. Suppose you were 
all to sail away; am I to sit and cry because I am 
left alone and solitary? Am I so unprovided with 
shells and dust? But children do this from folly ; 
and shall we be wretched through wisdom ? 

Every great gift is dangerous to a beginner. Study 
first how to live like a person in sickness ; that in time 
you may know how to live like one in health. Ab. 
stain from food. Drink water. Totally repress your 


228 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


desire, for some time, that you may at length use it 
according to reason ; and, if so, when you are stronger 
in virtue, you will use it well. No; but we would 
live immediately as men already wise ; and be of ser- 
vice to mankind. Of what service? What are you 
doing? Why; have you been of so much service to 
yourself that you would exhort them? You exhort! 
Would yon be of service to them, show them by your 
own example what kind of men philosophy makes ; 
and do not trifle. When you eat, be of service to 
those who eat with you; when you drink, to those 
who drink with you. Be of service to them by giv- 
ing way to all, yielding to them, bearing with them ; 
and not by venting upon them your own ill humor. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
MISCELLANEOUS. 


S bad performers cannot sing alone, but in a 

chorus ; so some persons cannot walk alone. If 

you are anything, walk alone ; talk by yourself; and 

do not skulk in the chorus. Think a little at last; 

look about you; sift yourself that you may know 
what you are. 

If a person drinks water, or does anything else for 
the sake of training, upon every occasion he tells all 
he meets, ‘I drink water.” Why, do you drink wa- 
ter merely for the sake of drinking it? If it does 
you any good to drink it, do so; if not, you act ridic- 
ulously. But, if it is for your advantage that you 
drink it, say nothing about it before those who would 
criticise. Yet can it be possible that these are the 
very people you wish to please ? 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 229 


Of actions, some are performed on their own ac- 
count; others from circumstances, others from com- 
plaisance, others upon system. 

Two things must be rooted out of men, conceit and 
diffidence. Conceit lies in thinking that you want 
nothing; and diffidence in supposing it impossible 
that under such adverse circumstances, you should 
ever succeed. Now conceit is removed by confuta- 
tion; and of this Socrates set the example. And 
consider and ascertain that the undertaking is not 
impracticable. The inquiry itself will do you no 
harm; aud it is almost being a philosopher to in- 
quire how it is possible to employ our desire and 
aversion without hindrance. 

“T am better than you; for my father has been 
consul.” — “I have been a tribune,” says another, — 
“and you not.” If we were horses, would you say, 
“¢ My father was swifter than yours? I have abun- 
dance of oats and bay and fine trappings? ’”’” What : 
now, if, while you were saying this, I should answer: 
“ Beit so. Let us run a race then.” Is there noth- 
ing in man analogous to a race in horses, by which it 
may be decided which is better or worse? Is there 
not honor, fidelity, justice? Show yourself the better 
in these, that you may be the better asa man. But 
if you only tell me that you can kick violently, I will . 
tell you again that you value yourself on what is the , 
property of an ass. 


230 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER XV.* 


THAT EVERYTHING IS TO BE UNDERTAKEN WITH 
OCIRCUMSPECTION. 


N every affair consider what precedes and follows, 
and then undertake it. Otherwise you will begin 
with spirit indeed, careless of the consequences, and 
when these are developed, you will shamefully desist. 
““T would conquer at the Olympic Games.” But con- 
sider what precedes and follows, and, then, if it be 
for your advantage, engage in the affair. You must 
conform to rules, submit toa diet, refrain from dain- 
ties; exercise your body, whether you choose it or 
not, at a stated hour, in heat and cold; you must 
drink no cold water, and sometimes no wine. Ina 
word, you must give yourself up to your trainer as 
to a physician. Then, in the combat, you may be 
thrown into a ditch, dislocate your arm, turn your 
ankle, swallow abundance of dust, receive stripes 
{for negligence]; and after all, lose the victory. 
When you have reckoned up all this, if your incli- 
nation still holds, set about the combat. Otherwise, 
take notice, you will behave like children who some- 
times play wrestlers, sometimes gladiators; some- 
times blow a trumpet, and sometimes act a tragedy, 
when they happen to have seen and admired these 
shows. Thus you too will be at one time a wrestler, 
at another a gladiator; now a philosopher, now an 
orator; but nothing in earnest. Like an ape you 
mimic all you see, and one thing after another is sure 


* This fifteenth chapter makes the twenty-ninth of the Enchiri- 
dion ; but with some varieties of reading. — C 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 231 


to please you; butis out of favor as soon as it be- 
comes familiar.. For you have never entered upon 
anything considerately, nor after having surveyed 
and tested the whole matter; but carelessly, and with 
a half-way zeal. Thus some, when they have seen a 
philosopher, and heard a man speaking like Euphra- 
tes,* — though indeed who can speak like him ?— 
have a mind to be philesophers too. Consider first, 
man, what the matter is, and what your own nature 
is able to bear. If you would be a wrestler, consider 
your shoulders, your back, your thighs; for differ- 
ent persons are made for different things. Do you 
think that you can act as you do and be a philoso- 
pher? That you can eat, drink, be angry, be discon- 
tented, as you are now? You must watch, you must 
labor, you must get the better of certain appetites ; 
must quit your acquaintances, be despised by your 
servant, be laughed at by those you meet; come off 
worse than others in everything, in offices, in honors, 
before tribunals. When you have fully considered 
all these things, approach, if you please; if, by part- 
ing with them, you have a mind to purchase seren~ 
ity, freedom, and tranquillity. If not, do not come 
hither ; do not, like children, be now a philosopher, 
then a publican, then an orator, and then one of Cx- 
sar’s officers. These things are not consistent. You 
must be one man either good or bad. You must cul- 
tivate either your own Reason or else externals; ap- 
ply yourself either to things within or without you; 
that is, be either a philosopher, or one of the mob. 


* Euphrates was « philosopher of Syria, whose character is de- 
scribed, with the highest encomiums, by Pliny. See L. I. Ep. x.—C. 


232 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER XVI. 


THAT CAUTION SHOULD BE USED, AS TO PERSONAL 
FAMILIARITY. 


E who frequently mingles with others, eitler in 
conversation or at entertainments, or in any 
familiar way of living, must necessarily either become 
like his companions, or bring them over to his own 
way. For, if a dead coal be applied to a live one, 
either the first will quench the last, or the last kindle 
the first. Since, then, the danger is so great, cau- 
tion must be used in entering into these familiarities 
with the crowd; remembering that it is impossible 
to touch a chimney-sweeper without being partaker 
of his soot. For what will you do, if you have to 
discuss gladiators, horses, wrestlers, and, what is 
worse, men? “Such a one is good, another had; 
this was well, that ill done.” Besides, what if any 
one should sneer, or ridicule, or be ill-natured? Are 
any of you prepared, like a harper, who, when he 
- takes his harp, and tries the strings, finds out which 
notes are discordant, and knows how to put the in- 
strument in tune? Have any of you such a faculty 
as Socrates had; who in every conversation, could 
bring his companions to his own purpose? Whence 
should you have it? You must therefore be carried 
along by the crowd. And why are they more power- 
ful than you? Because they utter their corrupt dis- 
courses from sincere opinion, and you your good ones 
only from your lips. Hence they are without strength 
or life ; and itis disgusting to hear your exhortations 
and your poor miserable virtue proclaimed up hill and 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 233 


down. Thus it is that the crowd gets the better of 
you; for sincere opinion is always strong, always in- 
vincible. Therefore before wise sentiments are fixed 
in you, and you have acquired some power of self-de- 
fence, I advise you to be cautious in popular inter- 
course, otherwise, if you have any impressions made 
on you in the schools, they will melt away daily like 
wax before the sun. Get away then, far from the 
sun, while you have these waxen opinions. 

It is for this reason that the philosophers advise us 
to leave our country; because habitual practices draw 
the mind aside, and prevent the formation of new 
habits. We cannot bear that those who meet us 
should say, “ Hey-day! such a one is turned philos- 
opher, who was formerly thus and so.” Thus phy- 
sicians send patients with lingering distempers to 
another place and another air; and they do right. 
Do you too import other manners instead of those 
you carry out. Fix your opinions, and exercise 
yourself in them. No; but you go hence to the 
theatre, to the gladiators, to the walks, to the circus ; 
then hither again, then back again ;—just the same 
persons all the while! No good habit, no criticism, 
no animadversion upon ourselves. No observation 
what use we make of the appearances presented to 
our minds; whether it be conformable, or contrary 
to Nature; whether we interpret them rightly or 
wrongly. Can I say to the inevitable that it is noth- 
ing tome? If this be not yet your case, fly from 
your former habits: fly from the crowd if you would 
ever begin to be anything. 


234 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER XVII. 
OF PROVIDENCE. 


HENEVER you lay anything to the charge of 
Providence, do but reflect, and you will find 
that it has happened agreeably to Reason. 

“Well; but a dishonest man has the advantage.” 

In what? 

“Tn money.” 

Here he ought to surpass you ; because he flatters, 
he is shameless, he keeps awake. Where is the won- 
der? But look whether he has the advantage of you 
in fidelity or in honor. You will find he has not; 
but that wherever it is best for you to have the ad- 
vantage of him, there you have it. I once said to one 
who was full of indignation at the good fortune of 
Philostorgus, “‘ Why, would you be willing to sleep 
with Sura?’’?* Heaven forbid, said he, that day 
should ever come! Why then are you angry that he 
is paid for what he sells; or how can you call him 
happy in possessions acquired by means which you 
detest? Or what harm does Providence do in giving 
the best things to the best men? Is it not better to 
have a sense of honor than to be rich? ‘“‘ Granted.” 
Why then are you angry, man, if you have what is 
best? Always remember, then, and have it in mind 
that a better man has the advantage of a worse in 
that direction in which he is better; and you will 
never have any indignation. 


* This person is not known. One of his name is mentioned in 
the Acts of Ignatius, as being consul at the time when he suffered 
martyrdom. —C, 2 “hota got. 

i 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 235 


“ But my wife treats me ill.” 

Well; if you are asked what is the matter, answer, 
“ My wife treats me ill.” 
> “Nothing more?” 

Nothing. 

“‘ My father gives me nothing.” But to denomi- 
nate this an evil, some external and false addition 
must be made. We are not therefore to get rid of 
poverty, but of our impressions concerning it; and 
we shall do well. 

When Galba was killed, somebody said to Ru- 
fus, “ Now, indeed, the world is governed by Provi- 
dence.” I had never thought, answered Rufus, of 
extracting through Galba the slightest proof that the 
world was governed by Providence. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


THAT WE OUGHT NOT TO BE ALARMED, BY ANY NEWS 
THAT IS BROUGHT US. 


HEN any alarming news is brought you, always 

have it ready in mind that no news can be 
brought you concerning what is within the power of 
your own Will. Can any one bring you news that 
your opinions or desires are ill conducted? By no 
means; only that such a person is dead. What is 
that to you then ?—~ That somebody speaks ill of you. 
And what is that to you then? — That your father is 
perhaps forming some contrivance or other. Against 
what? Against your Will? Howcan he? No; but 
against your body, against your estate? You are 
very safe; this is not against you.— But the Judge 


236 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


has pronounced you guilty of impiety. And did not 
the Judges pronounce the same of Socrates? Is his 
pronouncing a sentence any business of yours? No. 
Then why do you any longer trouble yourself about 
it? There is a duty incumbent on your father, which 
unless he performs, he loses the character of a father, 
of natural affection, of tenderness. Do not desire 
him to lose anything else, by this; for every man suf- 
fers precisely where he errs. Your duty, on the 
other hand, is to meet the case with firmness, mod- 
esty, and mildness ; otherwise you forfeit piety, mod- 
esty, and nobleness. Well; and is your Judge free 
from danger? No. He runs an equal hazard. Why, 
then, are you still afraid of his decision ? What have 
you to do with the ills of another? Meeting the 
case wrongly would be your own ill. Letit be your 
only care to avoid that; but whether sentence is 
passed on you, or not, as it is the business of another, 
so the ill belongs to him. ‘Such a one threatens 
you.” Me? No. “He censures you.” Let him 
look to it, how he does his own duty. ‘“ He will give 
an unjust sentence against you.” Poor wretch! 


CHAPTER XIX. 


WHAT IS THE COMPARATIVE CONDITION OF THE PHI- 
LOSOPHER, AND OF THE CROWD. 


HE first difference between one of. the crowd 
and a philosopher is this; the one says, “Iam 
undone on the account of my child, my brother, my 
father’; but the other, if ever he be obliged to say, 
“Tam undone!” reflects, and adds, “ on account of 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 237 


myself.” For the Will cannot be restrained or hurt 
by anything to which the Will does not extend, but 
only by itself. If, therefore, we always would incline 
this way, and, whenever we are unsuccessful, would 
lay the fault on ourselves, and remember that there is 
no cause of perturbation and inconstancy, but wrong 
principles, I pledge myself to you that we should 
make some proficiency. But we set out in a very 
different way from the very beginning. In infancy, 
for example, if we happen to stumble, our nurse does 
not chide us, but beats the stone. Why; what harm 
‘has the stone done? Was it to move out of its place 
for the folly of your child? Again; if we do not find 
‘something to eat when we come out of the bath, our 
‘tutor does not try to moderate our appetite, but beats 
the cook. Why; did we appoint you tutor of the 
cook, man? No; but of our child. It is he whom 
you are to correct and improve. By these means, 
even when we are grown up, we appear children. 
For an unmusical person is a child in music; an 
illiterate person, a child in learning; and an un- 
taught one, a child in life. 


CHAPTER XX. 


THAT SOME ADVANTAGE MAY BE GAINED FROM EVERY 
OUTWARD CIRCUMSTANCE, 


N considering sensible phenomena, almost all per- 
sons admit good and evil to lie in ourselves and 
not in externals. No one says it is good to be day ; 
evil to be night; and the greatest evil that three 
should be four; but what? That knowledge is good 


238 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


and error evil. Even in connection with falsehood 
itself there may be one good thing; the knowledge 
that it is falsehood. Thus, then, should it be in life 
also. ‘ Health is a good ; sickness an evil.”’ No, sir. 
But what? A right use of health is a good ; a wrong 
one, an evil. So that, in truth, it is possible to be a 
gainer even by sickness. And is it not possible by 
death too? By mutilation? Do you think Men- 
zceus* an inconsiderable gainer by death? “ May 
whoever talks thus be such a gainer as he was!” 
Why, pray, sir, did not he preserve his patriotism, his 
magnanimity, his fidelity, his gallant spirit? And, 
if he had lived on, would he not have lost all these ? 
Would not cowardice, baseness, and hatred of his 
country, and a wretched love of life, have been his 
portion? Wellnow; donot you think him a consid- 
erable gainer by dying? No; but I warrant you the 
father of Admetus was a great gainer by living on in 
so mean-spirited and wretched a way as he did! For 
did not he die at last? For Heaven’s sake cease to 
be thus deluded by externals. Cease fo make your- 
selves slaves; first, of things, and, then, upon their 
account, of the men who have the power either to 
bestow, or to take them away. Is there any advan 
tage, then, to be gained from these men? From all; 
even from areviler. What advantage does a wrestler 
gain from him with whom he exercises himself before 
the combat? The greatest. And just in the same 
manner J exercise myself with this man. He exer- 
cises me in patience, in gentleness, in meekness. I 
am to suppose, then, that I gain an advantage from him 


* The son of Creon, —who killed himself, after he had been in- 
formed by an oracle that his death would procure a victory to the 
Thebans. — C. 


THH DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 239 


who exercises my neck, and puts my back and shoul- 
ders in order; so that the trainer may well bid me 
grapple him, with both hands, and the heavier he is 
the better for me; and yet it is no advantage to me 
when I am exercised in gentleness of temper! This 
is not to know how to gain an advantage from men. Is 
my neighbor a bad one? He is so to himself; but a 
good one to me. He exercises my good-temper, my 
moderation. Is my father bad? To himself; but 
not to me. “This is the rod of Hermes. Touch 
with it whatever you please, and it will become gold.” 
No; but bring whatever you please, and I will turn 
it into good. Bring.sickness, death, want, reproach, 
trial for life. All these, by the rod of Hermes, shall 
turn to advantage. “ What will you make of death?” 
Why, what but an ornament to you? what but a 
means of your showing, by action, what that man is 
who knows and follows the willof Nature. “ What 
will you make of sickness?” I will show its nature. 
T will make a good figure in it; I will be composed 
and happy; I will not beseech my physician, nor yet 
will I pray to die. What need you ask further? 
Whatever you give me, I will make it happy, fortu- 
nate, respectable, and eligible. 

No, but, “ take care not to be sick ; —it is an evil.” 
Just as if one should say, “Take care that the sem- 
blance of three being four does not present itself to 
you. It isan evil.’ How an evil, man? If TI think 
as I ought about it, what hurt will it any longer do 
me? Will it not rather be even an advantage to me? 
If then I think as I ought of poverty, of sickness, of 
political disorder, is not that enough for me? Why 
then must I any longer seek good or evil in exter- 
nals ? 


240 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


But how is it? These truths are admitted here; 
but nobody carries them home, for immediately every 
one is ina state of war with his servant, his neigh- 
bors, with those who sneer and ridicule him. Many 
thanks to Lepsius for proving every day that I know 
nothing. 


CHAPTER XXI. 


CONCERNING THOSE WHO READILY SET UP FOR 
SOPHISTS. 


HEY who have merely received bare maxims are 
presently inclined to throw them up, as a sick 
stomach does its food. Digest it, and then you will 
not throw it up; otherwise it will be crude and im- 
pure, and unfit for nourishment. But show us, from 
what you have digested, some change in your ruling 
faculty ; as wrestlers do in their shoulders, from their 
exercise and their diet; as artificers, in their skill, 
from what they have Jearnt. A carpenter does not 
come and say, “‘ Hear me discourse on the art of 
building”; but he hires a building, and fits it up, 
and shows himself master of his trade. Let it be 
your business likewise to do something like this; be 
manly in your ways of eating, drinking, dressing ; 
marry, have children, perform the duty of a citizen ; 
bear reproach; bear with an unreasonable brother ; 
bear with a father; bear with a son, a neighbor, a 
companion, as becomesaman. Show us these things, 
that we may see that you have really learned some- 
thing from the philosophers. No; but “come and 
hear me repeat commentaries.” . Get you gone, and 
seek somebody else upon whom to bestow them. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 241 


“Nay, but I will explain the doctrines of Chrysippus 
to you as no other person can; I will elucidate his 
style in the clearest manner.” And is it for this, 
then, that young men leave their country, and their 
own parents, that they may come and hear you 
explain words? Ought they not to return patient, 
active, free from passion, free from perturbation ; fur- 
nished with such a provision for life, that, setting out. 
with it, they will be able to bear all events well, and 
derive ornament from them? But how should you 
impart what you have not? For have you yourself 
done anything else, from the beginning, but spend 
your time in solving syllogisms and convertible propo- 
sitions and interrogatory arguments. “ But such a 
one has a school, and why should not I have one?” 
Foolish man, these things are not brought about 
carelessly and at haphazard. But there must he a fit 
age, and a method of life, and a guiding God. Is it 
not so? No one quits the port, or sets sail, till he 
hath sacrified to the gods, and implored their assist- 
ance; nor do men sow without first invoking Ceres. 
And shall any one who has undertaken so great a 
work attempt it safely without the gods? And shall 
they who apply to such a one, apply to him with suc- 
cess? What are you doing else, man, but divulging 
the mysteries? As if you said, “There is a temple 
at Eleusis, and here is one too. There is a priest, 
and I will make a priest here; there is a herald, and 
I will appoint a herald too; there is a torch-bearer, 
and I will have a torch-bearer; there are torches, 
and so shall there be here. The words said, the 
things done, are the same. Where is the difference 
betwixt one and the other?” Most impious man! 


is there no difference? Are these things of use, out 
16 


242 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


of place, and out of time? A man should come with 
sacrifices and prayers, previously purified, and his 
miud affected by the knowledge that he is approach- 
ing sacred and ancient rites. Thus the mysteries 
become useful; thus we come to have an idea that 
all these things were appointed by the ancients for 
the instruction and correction of life. But you di- 
vulge and publish them without regard to time and 
place, without sacrifices, without purity; you have 
not the garment that is necessary for a priest, nor the 
fitting hair nor girdle; nor the voice, nor the age, 
nor have you purified yourself like him. But, when 
you have got the words by heart, you say, “The 
mere words are sacred of themselves.” These things 
are to be approached in another manner. It is a 
great, it is a mystical affair; not given by chance, 
or to every one indifferently. Nay, mere wisdom, 
perhaps, is not a sufficient qualification for the care 
of youth. There ought to be likewise a certain read- 
iness and aptitude for this, and indeed a particular 
physical temperament: and, above all, a counsel 
from God to undertake this office, as he counselled 
Socrates to undertake the office of confutation ; Di- 
ogenes, that of authoritative reproof; Zeno, that of 
dogmatical instruction. But you set up for a phy- 
sician, provided with nothing but medicines, and 
without knowing, or having studied, where or how 
they are to be applied. ‘“ Why, such a one had me- 
dicines for the eyes, and I have the same.” Have 
you also, then, a faculty of making use of them? 
Do you at all know when, and how, and to whom, 
they will be of service? Why then do you act at 
hazard? Why are you careless in things of the 
greatest importance? Why do you attempt a mat- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 243 


ter unstiitable to you? Leave it to those who. can 
perform it and do it honor. Do not you too bring 
a scandal upon philosophy by your means; nor be 
one of those who cause the thing itself to be calumni- 
ated. But if mere theorems delight you, sit quietly 
and turn them over by yourself; but never call your- 
self a philosopher, nor suffer another to call you so; 
but say: he is mistaken; for my desires are. not 
different from what they were; nor my pursuits di- 
rected to other objects; nor my assents otherwise 
given ; nor have I at all made any change from my 
former condition in the use of things as they appear. 
Think and.speak thus of yourself, if you would think 
as you ought; if not, act at random, and do as you 
do; for it is appropriate to you. 


CHAPTER XXII. 
OF THE CYNIC PHILOSOPHY. 


HEN one of his scholars, who seemed inclined 

to the Cynic philosophy, asked him what a 
Cynic must be, and what was the general plan of 
that sect? Let us examine it, he said, at our leis- 
ure. But thus much I can tell you now, that he 
who attempts so great an affair without divine guid- 
ance is an object of divine wrath, and would only 
bring public dishonor upon himself. For in a well- 
regulated house no one comes and says to himself, 
“I ought to be the manager here.” If he does, and 
the master returns and sees him insolently giving 
orders, he drags him out, and has him punished. 
Such is the case likewise in this great city. For 


244 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


here, too, is a master of the family who orders every- 
thing. ‘You are the sun; you can, by making a cir- 
cuit, form the year and the seasons, and increase and 
nourish the fruits ; you can raise and calm the winds, 
and give an equable warmth to the bodies of men. 
Go; make your circuit, and thus move everything 
from the greatest to the least. You are a calf; when 
the lion appears act accordingly, or you will suffer for 
it. You are a bull; come and fight; for that is in- 
cumbent on you, and becomes you, and you can do 
it. You can lead an army to‘Troy; be you Aga- 
memnon. You can engage in single combat with 
Hector; be you Achilles.” But if Thersites had 
come and claimed the command, either lie would not 
have obtained it; or, if he had, he would have dis- 
graced himself before so many more witnesses. 

Do you, too, carefully deliberate upon this under- 
dertaking ; it is not what you think it. “I wear an 
old cloak now, and I shall have one then. I sleep 
upon the hard ground now, and I shall sleep so then. 
I will moreover take a wallet and a staff, and go 
about, and beg of those I meet, and begin by rebuk- 
ing them; and, if I see any one using effeminate 
practices, or arranging his curls, or walking in purple, 
I will rebuke him.” If you imagine this to be the 
whole thing, avaunt; come not near it: it belongs 
not to you. But, if you imagine it to be what it 
really is, and do not think yourself unworthy of it, 
consider how great a thing you undertake. 

First, with regard to yourself; you must no longer, 
in any instance, appear as now. You must accuse 
neither God nor man. You must altogether control 
desire; and must transfer aversion to such things 
only as are controllable by Will. You must have 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 245 


neither anger, nor resentment, nor envy, nor pity. 
Neither boy, nor girl, nor fame, nor dainties, must 
have charms for you. For you must know that other 
men indeed fence themselves with walls, and houses, 
and darkness, when they indulge in anything of this 
kind, and have many concealments; a man shuts the 
door, places somebody before the apartment: “ Say 
that he is out; say that he is engaged.” But the 
Cynic, instead of all this, must fence himself with 
virtuous shame; otherwise he will be: improperly 
exposed in the open air. This is his house, this his 
door, this his porter, this his darkness. He must not 
wish to conceal anything relating to himself; for, if 
he does, he is gone; he has lost the Cynic character, 
the openness, the freedom; he has begun to fear 
something external; he has begun to need conceal- 
ment; nor can he get it when he will. For where 
shall he conceal himself, or how? For if this tutor, 
this pedagogue of the public, shonld happen to slip, 
what must he suffer? Can he then, who dreads these 
things, be thoroughly bold within, and prescribe to 
other men? Impracticable, impossible. 

In the first place, then, you.must purify your own 
ruling faculty, to match this method of life. Now the 
material for me to work upon is my own mind; as 
wood is for a carpenter, or leather for a shoemaker ; 
and my business is, a right use of things as they ap- 
pear. But body is nothing to me: its parts nothing 
tome. Let death come when it will; either of the 
whole body or of part. “Go into exile.’ And 
whither? Can any one turn me out of the universe? 
He cannot. But wherever I go, there is the sun, the 
moon, the stars, dreams, auguries, communication, 
with God. And even this preparation is by no 


246 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


means sufficient for a true Cynic. But it must fur- 
ther be known that he is a messenger sent from Zeus 
to men, concerning good and evil; to show them that 
they are mistaken, and seek the essence of good and 
evil where it is not, but do not observe it where it is; 
that he is a spy, like Diogenes, when he was brought 
to Philip, after the battle of Cheronea. For, in ef- 
fect, a Cynic is a spy to discover what things are 
friendly, what hostile, to man; and he must, after 
making an accurate observation, come and tell them 
the truth; not be struck with terror, so as to point 
out to them enemies where there are none; nor, in 
any other instance, be disconcerted or confounded by 
appearances. 

He must, then, if it should so happen, be able to 
lift up his voice, to come upon the stage, and say, 
like Socrates: ““O mortals, whither are you hurrying? 
What are you about? Why do you tumble up and 
down, O miserable wretches! like blind men? You 
are going the wrong way, and have forsaken the right. 
You seek prosperity and happiness in a wrong place, 
where they are not; nor do you give credit to anoth-- 
er, who shows you where they are. Why do you seek 
this possession without? It lies not in the body; if 
you do not believe me, look at Myro, look at Ofellius. 
It is not in wealth; if you do not believe me, look 
upon Creesus ; look upon the rich of the present age, 
how full of lamentation their life is. It is not in 
power ; for otherwise, they who have been twice and 
thrice consuls must be happy; but they are not. To 
whom shall we give heed in these things? To yon 
who look only upon the externals of their condition, 
and are dazzled by appearances, — or to themselves ? 
What do they say? Hear them when they groan, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 247 


when they sigh, when they pronounce themselves the 
more wretched and in more danger from these very 
consulships, this glory and splendor. It is not in 
empire ; otherwise Nero and Sardanapalus had been 
happy. But not even Agamemnon was happy, though 
a, better man than Sardanapalus or Nero. But, when 
others sleep soundly what is he doing ? 
“Forth by the roots he rends his hairs.” * 


And what does he himself say ? 


«I wander bewildered ; my heart leaps forth from my bosom.” 


Why ; which of your affairs goes ill, poor wretch ? 
Your possessions? No. Your body? No. But you 
have gold and brass in abundance. What then goes 
ill? That part of you is neglected and corrupted, 
whatever it be called, by which we desire, and 
shrink ; by which we pursue, and avoid. How neglect- 
ed? It is ignorant of that for which it was naturally 
formed, of the essence of good, and of the essence of 
evil. It is ignorant what is its own, and what anoth- 
er’s. And, when anything belonging to others goes 
ill, it says, “I am undone; the Greeks are in dan- 
ger!” (Poor ruling faculty ! which alone is neglect- 
ed, and has no care taken of it.) “ They will die by 
the sword of the Trojans!” And, if the Trojans 
should not kill them, will they not die? “Yes, but 
not all at once.” Why, where is the difference ? 
For if it be an evil to die, then whether it be all at 
once or singly, it is equally an evil. Will anything 
more happen than the separation of soul and body ? 
“Nothing.” And, when the Greeks perish, is the 
door shut against you? Is it not in your power to 
die? “Itis.” Why then do you lament, while you 


* Homer, Iliad, X. 15; 91-5.—H. 


248 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


are a king and hold the sceptre of Zeus? A king is 
no more to be made unfortunate than a god. What 
are you, then? You are a mere shepherd, truly so 
called ; for you weep, just as shepherds do when the 
wolf seizes any of their sheep ; and they who are gov- 
erned by you are mere sheep. But why do you 
come hither? Was your desire in any danger ? 
Your aversion? Your pursuits? Your avoidances? 
“No,” he says, “but my brother’s wife has been 
stolen.”’ Is it not great good luck, then, to be rid of 
an adulterous wife? ‘But must we be held in con- 
tempt by the Trojans?” What are they? Wise 
men, or fools? If wise, why do you go to war with 
them? If fools, why do you heed them? 

Where, then, does our good lie, since it does not 
lie in these things? Tell us, sir, you who are our 
messenger and spy. Where you do not think, nor 
are willing to seek it. For, if you were willing, you 
would find it in yourselves; nor would you wander 
abroad, nor seek what belongs to others, as your own. 
Turn your thoughts upon yourselves. Consider the 
impressions which you have. What do you imagine 
good to be? What is prosperous, happy, unhindered. 
Well; and do you not naturally imagine it great? 
Do you not imagine it valuable? Do you not ima- 
gine it incapable of being hurt? Where then, must 
you seek prosperity and exemption from hindrance? 
In that which is enslaved, or free? ‘In the free.” 
Is your body, then, enslaved, or free? We do not 
know. Do you not know that it is the slave of fever, 
gout, defluxion, dysentery; of a tyrant; of fire, steel ; 
of everything stronger than itself? “Yes, it is a 
slave.” How, then, can anything belonging to the 
body be unhindered? And how can that be great 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 249 


or valuable, which is by nature lifeless, earth, clay ? 
What, then, have you nothing free? ‘“ Possibly noth- 
ing.” Why, who can compel you to assent to what 
appears false? No one. Or who, not to assent to 
what appears true? No one. Here, then, you see 
that there is something in you naturally free. But 
which of you can desire or shun, or use his active 
powers of pursuit or avoidance, or prepare or plan 
anything, unless he has been impressed by an appear- 
ance of its being for his advantage or his duty? No 
one. You have then, in these too, something unre- 
strained and free. Cultivate this, unfortunates ; take 
care of this; seek for good here. “But how is it 
possible that a man destitute, naked, without house 
or home, squalid, unattended, an outcast, can lead 
a prosperous life?”? See; God hath sent us one, to 
show in practice that it is possible. “Take notice 
of me that I am without a country, without a house, 
without an estate, without a servant; I lie on the 
ground; have no wife, no children, no coat; but 
have only earth and heaven and one poor cloak. 
And what need I? Am not I without sorrow, with- 
out fear? AmnotI free? Did any of you ever see 
me disappointed of my desire, or incurring my aver- 
sion? Did Jever blame God or man? Did I ever 
accuse any one? Have any of you seen me look dis- 
contented ? How do I treat those whom you fear 
and of whom you are struck with awe? Is it not like 
poor slaves? “Who that sees me does not think that 
he sees his own king and master?” This is the lan- 
guage, this the character, this the undertaking, of a 
Cynic. No, [but you think only of] the wallet and the 
staff and a large capacity of swallowing and appro- 
priating whatever is given you; abusing unseasona- 


250. THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


bly those you meet, or showing your bare arm. Do 
you consider how you shall attempt so important 
an undertaking? First take a mirror. View your 
shoulders, examine your back, your loins. It is the 
Olympic Games, man, for which you are to be entered; 
not a poor slight contest. In the Olympic Games a 
champion is not allowed merely to be conquered and 
depart; but must first be disgraced in the view of 
the whole world, not of the Athenians alone, or Spar- 
tans, or Nicopolitans ; and, then, he who has prema- 
turely departed must be whipped too; and, before 
that, must have suffered thirst, and heat, and have 
swallowed an abundance of dust. 

Consider carefully, know yourself, consult the Di- 
vinity; attempt nothing without God; for, if he 
couusels you, be assured that it is his will, whether 
that you should become eminent, or that you should 
suffer many a blow. For there is this fine circum- 
stance connected with the character of a Cynic, that 
he must be beaten like an ass, and yet, when beaten, 
must love those who beat him as the father, as the 
brother of all. 

“No, to be sure; but, if anybody beats you, stand 
publicly and roar out ‘O! Cesar, am I to suffer 
such things in breach of your peace? Let us go 
before the Proconsul.’” 

But what is Cesar to a Cynic, or what is the Pro- 
consul, or any one else, but Zeus, who hath depnted 
him, and whom he serves. Does he invoke any other 
but him? And is he not persuaded that, whatever 
he suffers of this sort, it is Zeus who doth it to exer 
cise him? Now Hercules, when he was exercised by 
Eurystheus, did not think himself miserable; but 
executed with alacrity all that was to be done. And 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 251 


shall he who is appointed to the combat, and exer- 
cised by Zeus, cry out and take offence at things? A 
worthy person, truly, to bear the sceptre of Diogenes! 
Hear what he in a fever, said to those who were pass- 
ing by.* “Foolish men, why do you not stay? Do 
you take such a journey to Olympia to see the de- 
struction or combat of the champions ; and have you 
no inclination to see the combat between a man and 
a fever? ’’ Such a one, who took a pride in difficult 
circumstances, and thought himself worthy to be a 
spectacle to those who passed by, was a likely per- 
son indeed to accuse God, who had deputed him, as 
treating him unworthily! For what subject of accu- 
sation shall he find? That he preserves a decency 
of behavior? With what does he find fault? That 
he sets his own virtue in a clearer light? Well; and 
what does he say of poverty? Of death? Of pain? 
How did he compare his happiness with that of the 
Persian king; or rather, thought it beyond compari- 
sou! For amidst perturbations, and griefs, and fears, 
and disappointed desires, and incurred aversions, how 
can there be any entrance for happiness ? And where 
there are corrupt principles, there must all these 
things necessarily be. 

—The same young man inquiring, whether, if a 


* St. Jerome, cited by Mr. Upton, gives the following, somewhat 
different account of this matter. Diogenes, as he was going to the 
Olympic Games, was taken with a fever, and laid himself down in 
the road; his friends would have put him into some vehicle; but he 
refused it, and bid them go on to the show. “This night,” said he, 
“I will either conqner, or be conquered. If I conquer the fever, I 
will come to the games; if it conquers me, I will descend to Hades.’ 

[Si febrim vicero, ad Agonem veniam : 

Si me viccrit, ad inferna descendam ” 
Jerome ady. Jovianum, Lib. Il.— HJ 


252 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


friend should desire to come to him and take care 
of him when he was sick, he should comply? And 
where, says Epictetus, will you find me the friend of 
a Cynic? For to be worthy of being numbered 
among his friends, a person ought to be such another 
as himself; he ought to be a partner of the sceptre 
and the kingdom, and a worthy minister, if he would 
be honored with his friendship; as Diogenes was the 
friend of Antisthenes; as Crates, of Diogenes. Do 
you think that he who only comes to him, and salutes, 
him, is his friend; and that he will think him worthy 
of being entertained as such? If such a thought 
comes into your head, rather look round you for 
some desirable dunghill to shelter you in your fever 
from the north wind, that you may not perish by 
taking cold. But you seem to me to prefer to get 
into somebody’s house, and to be well fed there 
awhile. What business have you then, even to at- 
tempt so important an undertaking as this? 

“ But,” said the young man, “ will marriage and pa- 
rentage be recognized as important duties by a Cynic?” 

Grant me a community of sages, and no one there, 
perhaps, will readily apply himself to the Cynic phi- 
losophy. For on whose account should he there em- 
brace that method of life? However, supposing he 
does, there will be nothing to restrain him from mar- 
rying and having children. For his wife will be such 
another as himself; his father-in-law such another as 
himself; and his children will be brought up in the 
same manner. But as the state of things now is, like 
that of an army prepared for battle, is it not neces- 
sary that a Cynic should be without distraction ;* 


* Tt is remarkahle, that Epictetus here uses the same word (dze- 
ptowagres) with St. Paul, 1 Cor. vii. 35, and urges the same consid- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 2538 


entirely attentive to the service of God; at liberty 
to walk among mankind, not tied down to common 
duties, nor entangled in relations, which if he trans- 
gresses, he will no longer keep the character ofa 
wise and good man ; and which if he observes, there 
is an end of him, as the messenger, and spy, and her- 
ald of the gods? For consider, there are some offices 
-due to his father-in-law ; some to the other relations 
_of his wife ; some to his wife herself: besides, after 
this, he is confined to the care of his family when 
sick, and to providing for their support. At the very 
least, he must have a vessel to warm water in, to 
bathe his child; there must be wool, oil, a bed, a 
cup, for his wife, after her delivery; and thus the 
furniture increases; more business, more distraction. 
“Where, for the future, is this king whose time is de- 
voted to the public good ? 


s 


* To whom the people are trusted, and many a care.” * 


Who ought to superintend others, married men, fath- 
ers of children ; — whether one treats his wife well or 
ill; who quarrels; which family is well regulated ; 
‘which not ;— like a physician who goes about and 
feels the pulse of his patients: ‘‘ You have a fever ; 
you the headache; you the gout. Do you abstain 
from food; do you eat; do you omit bathing; you 
must have an incision made: you be cauterized.” 
Where shall he have leisure for this who is tied down 
to common duties? Must he not provide clothes for 
his children; and*’send them with pens, and ink, and 
paper, to a schoolmaster? Must he not provide a 


eration, of applying wholly to the service of God, to dissuade from 
marriage. — C. 
* Homer, Iliad, I. 25.— H. 


254 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


bed for them,—for they cannot be Cynics from 
their very birth ?— Otherwise, it would have been 
better to expose them, as soon as they were born, 
than to kill them thus. Do you see to what we bring 
down our Cynic? How we deprive him of his king- 
dom? “Well, but Crates * was married.” The case 
of which you speak was a particular one, arising from 
love; and the woman was another Crates. But we 
are inquiring about ordinary and common marriages ; 
and in this inquiry we do not find the affair much 
suited to the condition of a Cynic. 

‘“‘ How then shall he keep up society ?” 

For Heaven’s sake, do they confer a greater bene- 
fit upon the world, who leave two or three brats in 
their stead, than those who, so far as possible, oversee 
all mankind ; what they do, how they live; what they 
attend to, what they neglect, in spite of their duty. 
Did all those who left children to the Thehans do 
them more good than Epaminondas, who died child- 
less? And did Priam who was the father of fifty 
profligates, or Danaus, or Aolus, conduce more to 
the advantage of society than Homer? Shall a mili- 
tary command, or any other post, then, exempt a 
man from marrying and becoming a father, so that 
he shall be thought to have made sufficient amends 
for the want of children ; and shall not the kingdom 
of a Cynic be a proper compensation for it? Per- 
haps we do not understand his grandeur, nor duly 
represent to ourselves the character of Diogenes; 
but we think of Cynics as they afe now, who stand 


* Crates, a rich Theban, gave away a large fortune, and assumed 
the wallet and staff of a Cynic philosopher. Hipparchia, a Thra- 
cian lady, forsook wealth and friends to share his poverty, in spite of 
his advice to the contrary. Diogenes Laertius: Crates. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 25- 


like dogs watching at tables, and who have only the 
lowest things in common with the others; else things 
like these would not move us, nor should we be aston- 
ished that a Cynic will not marry nor have children. 
Consider, sir, that he is the father of mankind ; that 
all men are his sons, and all women his daughters. 
Thus he attends to all; thus takes care of all. 
What! do you think it is from impertinence that he 
rebukes those he meets? He does it as a father, as a 
brother, as a minister of the common parent, Zeus. 

Ask me, if you please, too, whether a Cynic will 
engage in the administration of the commonwealth. 
What commonwealth do you inquire after, foolish 
man, greater than what he administers? Why should 
he harangue among the Athenians about revenues 
and taxes, whose business it is to debate with all 
mankind ; with the Athenians, Corinthians, and Ro- 
mans, equally; not about taxes and revenues, or 
peace and war, but about happiness and misery, pros- 
perity and adversity, slavery and freedom. Do you 
ask me whether a man engages in the administration 
of the commonwealth who administers such a com- 
monwealth as this? Ask me, too, whether he will 
accept any command? I will answer you again, 
What command, foolish one, is greater than that 
which he now exercises ? 

But he has need of a constitution duly qualified ; 
for, if he should appear consumptive, thin, and pale, 
his testimony has no longer the same authority. For 
he must not only give a proof to the vulgar, by the 
constancy of his mind, that it is possible to be a man 
of weight and merit without those things that strike 
them with admiration ; but he must show, too, by his 
body, that a simple and frugal diet, under the open 


256 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


air, does no injury to the constitution. ‘See, I and 
my body bear witness to this.” As Diogenes did; 
for he went about in hale condition, and gained the 
attention of the many by his mere physical aspect. 
But a Cynic in poor condition seems a mere beggar ; 
all-avoid him, all are offended at him ; for he ought 
not to appear slovenly, so as to drive people from 
him; but even his indigence should be clean and 
attractive. 

Much natural tact and acuteness are likewise neces- 
sary in a Cynic (otherwise he is almost worthless) ; 
that he may be able to give an answer, readily and 
pertinently, upon every occasion. So Diogenes, to 
one who asked him, “are you that Diogenes who 
does not believe there are any gods ?’? — How so, re- 
plied he, when I think you odious to them? Again ; 
when Alexander surprised him sleeping, and repeated, 


To sleep all the night becomes not a man who gives counsel” ; * 
before he was. quite awake, he responded, 


«To whom the people are trusted, and many a care.” 


But, above all, the reason of the man must be 
clearer than the sun ; otherwise he must necessarily 
be a common cheat and a rascal, if, while himself 
guilty of some vice, he reproves others. For consider 
how the case stands. Arms and guards give a power 
to common kings and tyrants of reproving and of 
punishing delinquents, though they be wicked them- 
selves; but to a Cynic, instead of arms and guards, 
conscience gives this power; when he knows that he 
has watched and labored for mankind; that he has 
slept pure, and waked still purer; and that he hath 


* Homer, Diad, Il. 24, 25.—H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 257 


regulated all his thoughts as the friend, as the minis- 
ter of the gods, as a partner of the empire of Zeus ; 
that he is ready to say, upon all occasions, 


« Conduct me, Zeus, and thon, O Destiny.” * 


And, “if it thus pleases the gods, thus let it be.” 
Why should he not dare to speak boldly to his own 
brethren, to his children ; in a word, to his kindred ? 
Hence he, who is thus qualified, is neither imperti- 
nent nor a busybody: for he is not busied about the 
affairs of others, but his own, when he oversees tho 
transactions of men. Otherwise call a general a busy- 
body, when he oversees, inspects, and watches his sol- 
diers and punishes the disorderly. But, if you reprove 
others, at the very time that you have booty under 
your own arm, I will ask you, if you had not better 
go into a corner, and eat up what you have stolen? 
But what have you to do with the concerns of others? 
For what are you? Are you the bull in the herd, or 
the queen of the bees? Show me such ensigns of em- 
pire, as she has from nature. But, if you are a drone, 
and arrogate to yourself the kingdom of the bees, do 
you not think that your fellow-citizens will drive you 
out, just as the bees do the drones ? 

A Cynic must, besides, have so much patience as 
to seem insensible and like a stone to the vulgar. No 
one reviles, no one beats, no one affronts him; but 
he has surrendered his body to be treated at pleasure 
by any one who will. For he remembers that the infe- 
rior, in whatever respect it is the inferior, must be 
conquered by the superior; and the body is inferior 
to the multitude, the weaker to the stronger. He 
never, therefore, enters into a combat where he can 


* Cleanthes, in Diogenes Laertins. — H. 
WwW 


258 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


be conquered; but immediately gives up what be- 
longs to others; he does not claim what is slavish 
and dependent; but in what concerns Will and the 
use of things as they appear, you will see that he has 
s0 many eyes, you would say Argus was blind to him. 
Is his assent ever precipitate? His pursuits ever 
rash? His desire ever disappointed? His aversion 
ever incurred? His aim ever fruitless? Is he ever 
querulous, ever dejected, ever envious? Here lies 
all his attention and application. With regard to 
other things, he enjoys profound quiet. All is peace. 
There is no robber, no tyrant for the Will. But there 
is for the body? Yes. The estate? Yes. Magis- 
tracies and honors? Yes. And what cares he for 
these? When any one, therefore, would frighten 
him with them, he says; “Go look for children; 
masks are frightful to them; but I know they are 
only shells, and have nothing within.” 

Such is the affair about which you are deliberat- 
ing ; therefore, if you please, for Heaven’s sake, defer 
it, and first consider how you are prepared for it. 
Observe what Hector says to Andromache: 


“War is the sphere for all men, and for me.” * 
Thus conscious was he of his own qualifications and 
of her weakness. 


* Homer, Iliad, VI. 492, 498. —H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 259 


CHAPTER XXIII. 


CONCERNING SUCH AS READ AND DISPUTE 
OSTENTATIOUSLY. 


IRST, say to yourself what you would be; and 
then do what you have to do. For in almost 
everything we see this to be the practice. Olym- 
pic champions first determine what they would be, 
and then act accordingly. To a racer, in a longer 
course, there must be one kind of diet, walking, 
anointing, and training; to one in a shorter, all 
these must be different; and to a Pentathlete, still 
more different. You will find the case the same in 
the manual arts. Ifa carpenter, you must have such 
and such things; if a smith, such other. For if we 
do not refer each of our actions to some end, we shall 
act at random ; if to an improper one, we shall miss 
our aim. Further; there is a general and a particu- 
lar end. The first is, to act as a man. What is 
comprehended in this? To be gentle, yet not sheep- 
ish; not to be mischievous, like a wild beast. But, 
the particular end relates to the study and choice of 
each individual. A harper is to act as a harper; a 
carpenter, as a carpenter; a philosopher, as a philos- 
opher ; an orator, as an orator. When, therefore, you 
say, “‘ Come, and hear me read,” observe, first, not ta 
do this at random ; and, in the next place, after you 
have found to what end you refer it, consider whether 
it be a proper one. Would you be useful,—or ba 
praised? You presently hear him say, “ What do I 
value the praise of the multitude?” And he says 
well; for this is nothing to a musician, or a geome- 


260 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


trician, as such. You would be useful then. In 
what? Tell us, that we too may run to make part 
of your audience. Now, is it possible for any one to 
benefit others, who has received no benefit himself? 
No; for neither can he who is not a carpenter, or a 
shoemaker, benefit any one in respect to those arts. 
Would you know, then, whether you have received 
benefit? Produce your principles, philosopher. What 
is the aim and promise of desire? Not to be disap- 
pointed. What of aversion? Not to be incurred. 
Come, do we fulfil this promise? Tell me the truth; 
but, if you falsify, I will tell it to you. The other day, 
when your audience came but coldly together, and 
did not receive what you said with acclamations of 
applause, you went away dejected. Again; the oth- 
er day when you were praised, you went about asking 
everybody, “ What did you think of me?” — “ Upon 
my life, sir, it was prodigious.” —“ But how did 
I express myself upon that subject ?”? —“ Which?” 
—‘‘Where I gave a description of Pan and the 
Nymphs.” * — “ Most excellently.” And do you tell 
me, after this, that you regulate your desires and 
aversions conformably to Nature? Get you gone! 
Persuade somebody else. 

Did not you, the other day, praise a man contrary 
to your own opinion? Did not you flatter a certain 
senator? Yet would you wish your own children to 
be like him? “ Heaven forbid!”? Why then did you 
praise and cajole him? “ He is an ingenuous young 
man, and attentive to discourses.” How so? “ He 
admires me.” Now indeed you have produced your 
proof. 


%* Mr. Upton observes that these florid descriptions were the prin- 
cipal study of the Sophists. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 261 


After all, what do you think? Do not these very 
people secretly despise you? When a man conscious 
of no good action or intention finds some philosopher 
saying, “You are a great genius, and of a frank and 
eandid disposition”; what do you think he says, but, 
“This man has some need of me.” Pray tell me 
what mark of a great genius he has shown. You 
see he has long conversed with you, has heard your. 
discourses, has attended your lectures. Has he turn- 
ed his attention to himself? Has he perceived his 
own faults? Has he thrown off his conceit? Does 
he seek an instructor? ‘Yes, he does.” An in- 
structor how to live? No, fool, but how to talk; for 
it is upon this account that he admires you. Hear 
what he says: ‘“ This man writes with very great art, 
and much more finely than Dion.” That is quite an- 
other thing. Does he say, This is a modest, faithful, 
calm person? But if he said this too, I would ask 
him, if he is faithful, what it is to be faithful? And 
if he could not tell, I would add, “ First learn the 
meaning of what you say, and then speak.” 

While you are in this bad disposition, then, and 
gaping after applauders, and counting your hearers, 
can you be of benefit to others? “To-day I had 
many more hearers.’’ —“‘ Yes, many ; we think there 
were five hundred.” —“‘ You say nothing; estimate 
them at a thousand.” — “ Dion never had so great an 
audience.” — ‘* How should he ?”’? — “ And they have 
a fine taste for discourses.” —“ What is excellent, 
sir, will move even a stone.” — Here is the language 
of a philosopher! Here is the disposition of one who 
is to be beneficial to mankind! Here is the man, 
attentive to discourses! Who has read the works of 
the Socratic philosophers, as such ; not as if they were 


262 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


the writings of orators, like Lysias and Isocrates. “I 
have often wondered by what arguments—”* No; 
“By what argument”; that is the more perfectly 
accurate expression. Is this to have read them any 
otherwise than as you read little pieces of poetry? 
If you read them as you ought, you would not dwell 
on such trifles, but would rather consider such a 
passage as this: “ Anytus and Melitus may kill, but 
they cannot hurt me.” And “I am always so dis- 
posed as to defer to none of my friends, but to that 
reason which, after examination, appears to me to 
be the best.” + Hence, who ever heard Socrates 
say, “I know, or teach anything”? But he sent dif- 
ferent people to different instructors ; they came to 
him, desiring to be introduced to the philosophers; 
and he took them and introduced them. No; but 
{you think] as he accompanied them he used to give 
them such advice as this: “‘ Hear me discourse to-day 
at the house of Quadratus.” Why should I hear 
you? Have you a mind to show me how finely you 
put words together, sir? And what good does that 
do you? ‘But praise me.” What do you mean by 
praising you? “Say, Incomparable! prodigious! ” 
Well; Ido say it. But if praise be that which the 
philosophers call by the appellation of good, what have 
{ to praise you for? If it be good to speak well, 
teach me, and I will praise you. ‘What, then, ought 
these things to be heard without pleasure?” By no 
means. I do not hear even a harper without pleas- 
ure; but am I therefore to devote myself to playing 


* These words are the beginning of Xenophon’s Memoirs of Soc- 
rates; and it was a debate among the minute critics, whether argu- 
ment or arguments was the proper reading. — C. 

t Plato, Apology, § 18; Crito, § 6.—H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 263 


upon the harp? Hear what Socrates says to his 
judges. “It would not be decent for me te appear 
before you, at this age, composing speeches like a 
boy.” * Like a boy, he says. For it is, without 
doubt, a pretty accomplishment to select words and 
place them together, and then to read or speak them 
gracefully in public; and in the midst of the dis- 
course to observe that “he vows by all that is good, 
there are but few capable of these things.” But does 
a philosopher apply to people to hear him? Does 
he not attract those who are fitted to receive benefit 
from him, in the same manner as the sun or their ne- 
cessary food does? What physician applies to any- 
body to be cured by him? (Though now indeed I 
hear that the physicians at Rome apply for patients ; 
but in my time they were applied to.) “I apply to 
you to come and hear that you are in a bad way, 
and that you take care of everything but what you 
ought; that you know not what is good or evil, and 
are unfortunate and unhappy.” A fine application! 
And yet, unless the discourse of a philosopher has 
this effect, both that and the speaker are lifeless. 
Rufus used to say, “If you are at leisure to praise 
me, I speak to no purpose.” And indeed he used to 
speak in such a manner, that each of us who heard 
him supposed that some person had accused us to 
him ; he so precisely hit upon what was done by us, 
and placed the faults of every one before his eyes. 
The school of a philosopher is a surgery. You 
are not to go out of it with pleasure, but with pain ; 
for you do not come there in health ; but one of you 
has a dislocated shoulder; another, an abscess; a 
third, a fistula; a fourth, the headache. And am I, 


* Plato, Apology, § 1.— H. 


264 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


then, to sit uttering pretty, trifling thoughts and lit 
tle exclamations, that, when you have praised me, 
you may each of. you go away with the same dislo- 
cated shoulder, the same aching head, the same fis- 
tula, and the same abscess that you brought? And 
is it for this that young men are to travel? And do 
they leave their parents, their friends, their relations, 
and their estates, that they may praise you while you 
are uttering little exclamations? Was this the prac- 
tice of Socrates? Of Zeno? Of Cleanthes? 

What then! is there not in speaking a style and 
manner of exhortation? Who denies it? Just as 
there is a manner of confutation and of instruction. 
But who ever, therefore, added that of ostentation for 
a fourth? For in what doth the hortatory manner 
consist? In being able to show, to one and all, the 
contradictions in which they are involved; and that 
they care for everything rather than what they mean 
to care for: for they mean the things conducive to 
happiness, but they seek them where they are not to 
be found. To effect this, must a thousand seats he 
placed, and an audience invited; and you, in a fine 
robe or cloak, ascend the rostrum, and describe the 
death of Achilles? Forbear, for Heaven’s sake, to 
bring, so far as you are able, good works and prac- 
tices into disgrace. Nothing, to be sure, gives more 
force to exhortation, than when the speaker shows 
that he has need of the hearers; but tell me who, 
when he hears you reading or speaking, is solicitous 
about himself? Or turns his attention upon himself? 
Or says, when he is gone away, “ The philosopher hit 
me well.” Instead of this, even though you are in 
high vogue, one hearer merely remarks to another, 
“‘ He spoke finely about Xerxes!’ —“ No,” says the 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 265 


other ; “but on the battle of Thermopyle!” Is this 
the audience for a philosopher ? 


CHAPTER XXIV. 


THAT WE OUGHT NOT TO BE AFFECTED BY THINGS 
NOT IN OUR OWN POWER. 


ET not another’s disobedience to Nature become 
an ill to you; for you were not born to be de- 
pressed and unhappy with others, but to be happy 
with them. And if any is unhappy, remember that 
he is so for himself; for God made all men to enjoy 
felicity and peace. He hath furnished all with means 
for this purpose; having given them some things for 
their own ; others, not for their own. ‘Whatever is 
subject to restraint, compulsion, or deprivation is not 
their own; whatever is not subject to restraint is 
their own. And the essence of good and evil He has 
placed in things which are our own; as it became . 
Him who provides for, and protects us, with paternal 
care. 

“ But I have parted with such a one, and he is 
therefore in grief.” 

And why did he esteem what belonged to another 
his own? Why did he not consider, while he was 
happy in seeing you, that you are mortal, that you 
are liable to change your abode? Therefore he bears 
the punishment of his own folly. But to what pur- 
pose, or for what cause, do you too suffer depression 
of spirits? Have you not studied these things? Like 
trifling, silly women, have you regarded the things 
you took delight in, the places, the persons, the con- 


266 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


versations, as if they were to last for ever; and do 
you now sit crying, because you do not see the same 
people, nor live in the same place? Indeed, you de- 
serve to be so overcome, and thus to become more 
wretched than ravens or crows, which, without groan- 
ing or longing for their former state, can fly where 
they will, build their nests in another place, and cross 
the seas. 

“ Ay, but this happens from their want of reason.” 

Was reason then given to us by the gods, for the 
purpose of unhappiness and misery, to make us live 
wretched and lamenting? 0, by all means, let every 
one be deathless! Let nobody go from home! Let 
us never go from home ourselves, but remain rooted 
to a spot, like plants! And if any of our acquaint- 
ance should quit his abode, let us sit and cry; and 
when he comes back, let us dance and clap our hands 
like children. Shall we never wean ourselves, and 
remember what we have heard from the philoso- 
phers, — unless we have heard them only as juggling 
enchanters ; that the universe is one great city, 
and the substance one-of which it is formed; that 
there must necessarily be a certain rotation of things ; 
that some must give way to others, some be dissolved, 
and others rise in their stead; some remain in the 
same situation, and others be moved; but that all is 
full of beloved ones, first of the gods, and then of 
men, by nature endeared to each other; that some 
must be separated, others live together, rejoicing in 
the present, and not grieving for the absent: and that 
man, besides a natural greatness of mind and con- 
tempt of things independent on his own will, is like- 
wise formed not to be rooted to the earth, but to go 
at different times to different places ; sometimes on 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 267 


urgent occasions, and sometimes merely for the sake 
of observation. Such was the case of Odysseus, who 


*¢ Saw the cities and watched the habits of various men.” * 


And, even before him, of Hercules, to travel over the 
habitable world, 


« Observing manners, good or ill, of men.” 


To expel and clear away the one, and, in its stead, 
to introduce the other. Yet how many friends do 
you not think he must have at Thebes? How many 
at Argos? How many at Athens? And how many 
did he acquire in his travels? He married, too, when 
he thought it a proper time, and became a father, and 
then quitied his children ; not lamenting and longing 
for them, nor as if he had left them orphans; for he 
knew that no human creature is an orphan, but that 
there is a father, who always, and without intermis- 
sion, takes care of all. For he had not merely heard 
it as matter of talk, that Zeus was the Father of 
Mankind ; but he esteemed and called him his own 
Father, and performed all that he did with a view to 
Him. Hence he was, in every place, able to live hap- 
py. But it is never possible to make happiness con- 
sistent with a longing after what is not present. For 
true happiness implies the possession of all which is 
desired, as in case of satiety with food; there must 
be no thirst, no hunger. 

“ But Odysseus longed for his wife, and sat weeping 
on a rock.” 

Why do you regard Homer and his fables in every- 
thing? Or,if Odysseus really did weep, what was he 
but a wretched man? But what wise and good man 


* Homer, Odyssey, I. 8. Afterwards, XV. 487.— H. 


268 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


is wretched? The universe is surely but ill governed, 
if Zeus does not take care that his subjects may be 
happy like himself. But these are unlawful and pro- 
fane thoughts ; and Odysseus, ifhe did indeed cry and 
bewail himself, was not a good man. For who can 
be a good man who does not know what he is? And 
who knows this, and yet forgets that all things made 
are perishable; and that it is not possible for man 
and man always to live together? What then? To 
desire impossibilities is base and foolish: it is the be- 
havior of a stranger [to the world] ; of one who fights 
against God in the only way he can, by holding false 
principles. 

“But my mother grieves when she does not see 
me.” 

And why has not she learned these doctrines? I 
do not say that care ought not to be taken that she 
may not lament; but that we are not to insist abso- 
lutely upon what is not in our own power. Now the 
grief of another is not in my power; but my own 
grief is. I will therefore absolutely suppress my 
own, for that is in my power ; and I will endeavor to 
suppress another’s grief so far as I am able; but I 
will not insist upon it absolutely, otherwise I shall 
fight against God; I shall resist Zeus, and oppose 
him in the administration of the universe. And not 
only my children’s children will bear the punishment 
of this disobedience and fighting against God, but I 
myself too; starting, and full of perturbation, both 
in the day-time and in my nightly dreams; trembling 
at every message, and having my peace dependent on 
intelligence from others. “Somebody is come from 
Rome.” “T trust no harm has happened.” ‘Why, 
what harm can happen to you where you are not? 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 269 


“From Greece.” — “No harm, I hope.” Why, at 
this rate, every place may be the cause of misfortune 
to you. Isit not enough for you to be unfortunate 
where you are, but it must happen beyond sea, too, 
and by letters? Such is the security of your condi- 
tion ! 

“ But what if my friends there should be dead?” 

What, indeed, but that those are dead who were 
born to die? Do you at once wish to grow old, and 
yet not to see the death of any one you love? Do 
you not know that, in a long course of time, many 
and various events must necessarily happen?. That 
a fever must get the better of one; a highwayman, of 
another ; a tyrant, of a third? For such is the world 
we live in; such they who live init with us. Heats 
and colds, improper diet, journeys, voyages, winds, 
and various accidents destroy some, banish others ; 
destine one to an embassy, another toa camp. And 
now, pray, will you sit in consternation about all 
these things ; lamenting, ‘disappointed, wretched, de- 
pendent on another; and not on one or two only, 
but ten thousand times ten thousand ! 

Is this what you have heard from the philosophers ? 
This what you have learned? Do you not know 
what sort of a thing warfare is? One must keep 
guard, another go out for a spy, another even to bat- 
tle. It is neither possible, nor indeed desirable, that 
all should be in the same place; but. you, neglecting 
to perform the orders of your General, complain 
whenever anything a little hard is commanded ; and 
do not consider what influence you have on the army, 
so far as lies in your power. For, if all should imi- 
tate you, nobody will dig a trench, or throw up a 
rampart, or stand guard, or expose himself to dan- 


270 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


ger, but every one will appear useless to the expe- 
dition. Again; if, you were a sailor in a voyage, 
suppose you were to fix upon one place, and there 
remain? If it should be necessary to climb the mast, 
refuse to do it; if to run to the bow of the ship, re- 
fuse to do it! And what captain would tolerate you? 
Would he not throw you overboard as a useless piece 
of goods and mere luggage, and a bad example to the 
other sailors? Thus, also, in the present case; every 
one’s life is a warfare, and that long and various. 
You must observe the duty of a soldier, and perform 
everything at the nod of your General, and even, if 
possible, divine what he would have done. For there 
is no comparison between the above-mentioned Gen- 
eral and this whom you now obey, either in power or 
excellence of character. You are placed in an exten- 
sive command, and not in a mean post; your life is 
a perpetual magistracy ? Do you not know that such 
a one must spend but little time on his affairs at 
home; but be much abroad, either commanding or 
obeying ; attending on the duties either of a magis- 
trate, a soldier, or a judge? And now, pray, would 
you be fixed and rooted on the same spot, like a 
plant ? 

“ Why ; it is pleasant.” 

Who denies it? And so is a ragout pleasant, and 
a fine woman is pleasant. Is not this just what they 
say who make pleasure their end? Do you not per- 
ceive whose language you have spoken? That of Epi- 
cureans and debauchees. And while you follow their 
practices and hold their principles, do you talk to us 
of the doctrines of Zeno and Socrates? Why do you 
not throw away as far as possible those assumed traits 
which belong to others, and with which you have 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 271 


nothing to do? What else do the Epicureans desire 
than to sleep without hindrance, and rise without 
compulsion ; and when they have risen, to yawn at 
their leisure and wash their faces; then write and 
read what they please ; then prate about some trifle 
or other, and be applauded hy their friends, what- 
ever they say; then go out for a walk, and, after 
they have taken a turn, bathe, and then eat, and 
then to bed; in what manner they spend their time 
there, why should one say? For it is easily guessed. 
Come now; do you also tell me what course of life 
you desire to lead, who are a zealot for truth, and 
Diogenes, and Socrates? What would you do at 
Athens? These very same things? Why then do 
you call yourself a Stoic? They who falsely pretend 
to the Roman citizenship are punished. severely ; and 
must those be dismissed with impunity who falsely 
claim so great a thing, and so venerable a title, as you? 
Or is not this impossible; and is there not a divine, 
and powerful, and inevitable law, which exacts the 
greatest punishments from those who are guilty of 
the greatest offences? For what says this law ? — Let 
him who claims what belongs not to him be arrogant, 
be vainglorious, be base, be a slave; let him grieve, 
let him envy, let him pity; and in a word, let him 
lament and be miserable. 

“ What then! would you have me pay my court to 
sucha one? Would you have me frequent his door?” 

If reason requires it for your country, for your 
relations, for mankind, why should you not go? 
You are not ashamed to go to the door of a shoe- 
maker when you want shoes; nor of a gardener when 
you want lettuce. Why then in regard to the rich, 
when you have some similar want? 


272 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


“ Ay; but I need not be awed before a shoemaker.” 

Nor before a rich man. 

“T need not flatter a gardener.” 

Nor a rich man. 

“ How, then, shall I get what I want?” 

Why, do I bid you go in expectation of getting it? 
No; ouly that you may do your duty. 

“ Why, then, after all, should I go?” 

That you may have gone; that you may have dis- 
charged the duties of a citizen, of a brother, of a 
friend. And, after all, remember, that you are go- 
ing as if to a shoemaker, to a gardener, who has no 
monopoly of anything great or respectable, though he 
should sell it ever so dear. You are going as if to 
buy lettuces, worth an obolus, but by no means worth 
a talent. So here too, if the matter is worth going to 
his door about, I will go; if it is worth talking with 
him about, I will talk with him. But if one must kiss 
his hand, too, and cajole him with praise; that is pay- 
ing too dear. It is not expedient for myself, nor my 
country, nor my fellow-citizens, nor my friends, to de- 
stroy what constitutes the good citizen and the friend. 

“ But one will appear not to have set heartily 
about the business, if one thus fails.” 

What, have you again forgotten why you went? 
Do you not know that a wise and good man does 
nothing for appearance; but everything for the sake 
of having acted well ? 

“ What advantage is it, then, to him, to have acted 
well?” 

What advantage is it to one who writes down 
the name of Dion without a blunder? The: having 
written it. 

“Ts there no reward, then?” 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 273 


Why ; do you seek any greater reward for a good 
man than the doing what is fair and just? And yet, 
at Olympia, you desire nothing else; but think it 
enough to be crowned victor. Does it appear to you 
so small and worthless a thing to be just, good, and 
happy? Besides; being introduced by God into this 
Great City [the world] and bound to discharge at 
this time the duties of a man, do you still want 
nurses and a mamma; and are you conquered and 
effeminated by the tears of poor weak women? Are 
you thus determined never to cease being an infant ? 
Do not you know that, if one acts like a child, the 
older he is, so much the more he is ridiculous ? 

Did you never visit any one at Athens at his own 
house ? 

“Yes ; whomsoever I pleased.” 

Why ; now you are here, be willing to visit this per- 
son, and you will still see whom you please ; only 
let it be without meanness, without undue desire: or 
aversion, and your affairs will go well; but their 
going well, or not, does not consist in going to: the 
house and standing at the door, or the contrary ; 
but lies within, in your own principles; when you 
have acquired a contempt for things uncontrollable 
by Will, and esteem none of them your own, but 
hold that what belongs to you is only to judge and 
think, to exert rightly your aims, your desires, and 
aversions. What further room is there after this for 
flattery, for meanness? Why do you still long for 
the quiet you elsewhere enjoyed; for places familiar 
to you? Stay a little, and these will become familiar 
to you in their turn; and, then, if you are so mean- 
spirited, you may weep and lament again on leaving 


these. 
18 


274 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


“ How, then, am I to preserve an affectionate dis- 
position ? 

As becomes a noble-spirited and happy person. 
For reason will never tell you to be dejected and 
broken-hearted ; or to depend on another; or to 
reproach either God or man. Be affectionate in 
such a manner as to observe all this. But if, from 
affection, as you call it, you are to be a slave and 
miserable, it is not worth your while to be affection- 
ate. And what restrains you from loving any one as 
a mortal, —as a person who may be obliged to quit 
you? Pray did not Socrates love his own children? 
But it was as became one who was free, and mindful 
that his first duty was, to gain the love of the gods. 
Hence he violated no part of the character of a good 
man, either in his defence or in fixing a penalty on 
himself.* Nor yet before, when he was a senator, 
or a soldier. But we make use of every pretence 
to be mean-spirited; some, on account of a child; 
some, of a mother; and some, of a brother. But it 
is not fit to be unhappy on account of any one; but 
happy on account of all; and chiefly of God, who 
has constituted us for this purpose. What! did 
Diogenes love nobody; who was so gentle and be- 
nevolent as cheerfully to undergo so many pains and 


* It was the custom at Athens, in cases where no fixed punish- 
ment was appointed by the law, before the jndges gave sentence, to 
ask the criminal himself what penalty he thonght he deserved. Soc- 
rates refused either to comply with this form himself, or suffer any 
of his friends to do it for him; alleging that the naming a penalty 
was a confession of gnilt. When the judges therefore asked him 
what penalty he thonght he deserved, he answered, « The highest 
honors and rewards, and to be maintained in the Prytaneum at the 
public expense.” An answer which so extremely irritated his judges, 
that they immediately condemned him to death. —C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 275 


miseries of body for the common good of mankind? 
Yes, he did love them; but how? As became a min- 
ister of Zeus; at once caring for men, and obedient 
to God. Hence the whole earth, not any particular 
place, was his country. And when he was taken cap- 
tive he did not long for Athens and his friends and 
acquaintance there; but made himself acquainted 
with the pirates, and endeayored to reform them; 
and when he was at last sold into captivity, he lived 
at Corinth just as before at Athens; and, if he had 
gone to the Perrhcebeans,* he would have been ex- 
actly the same. Thus is freedom acquired. Hence 
he used to say, “Ever since Antisthenes made me 
free + I have ceased to be a slave.” How did he 
make him free? Hear what he says. “He taught 
me what was my own and what not. An estate is 
not my own. Kindred, domestics, friends, reputa- 
tion, familiar places, manner of life, all belong to 
another.””»—“ What is your own then ?”—“ The 
right use of the phenomena of existence. He showed 
me that I have this, not subject to restraint or com- 
pulsion ; no one can hinder or force me in this, any 
otherwise than as I please. Who, then, after this, 
has any power over me? Philip, or Alexander, or 
Perdiccas, or the Persian king? Whence should 
they have it? For he that is to be subdued by man 
must first be subdued by things. He, therefore, of 
whom neither pleasure, nor pain, nor fame, nor riches, 
can get the better ; and he who is able, whenever he 
thinks fit, to abandon his whole body with contempt 
and depart, whose slave can he ever be? Tio whom 
is he subject?” But if Diogenes had taken pleasure 


* A people towards the extremity of Greece. —C. 
+ Diogenes was the disciple of Antisthenes. — C. 


276 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


in living at Athens, and had been subdued by that 
manner of life, his affairs would have been at every 
one’s disposal ; and whoever was stronger would have 
had the power of grieving him. How would he have 
flattered the pirates, think you, to make them sell 
him to some Athenian, that he might see again the 
fine Pireus, the Long Walls, and the Citadel? How 
would you see them? As a slave and a miserable 
wretch? And what good would that do you? “No; 
but as free.” How free? See, somebody lays hold 
on you, takes you away from your usual manner of 
life, and says: “ You are my slave; for it is in my 
power to restrain you from living as you like. It is 
in my power to afflict and humble you. Whenever I 
please you may be cheerful once more; and set out 
elated for Athens.” What do you say to him who 
thus enslaves you? What rescuer can you find? Or 
dare you not so much as look up at him; but, with- 
out making many words, do you supplicate to be dis- 
missed? Why, you ought even to go to prison, man, 
with alacrity, with speed, outstripping your conduc- 
tors. Instead of this do you regret living at Rome 
and long for Greece? And, when you must die, will 
you then, too, come crying to us, that you shall no 
more see Athens, nor walk in the Lyceum? Is it for 
this that you have travelled? Is it for this that you 
have been seeking for somebody to do you good? 
What good? That you may the more easily solve 
syllogisms and manage hypothetical arguments? 
And is it for this reason you left your brother, your 
country, your friends, your family, that you might 
carry back such acquirements as these? So that you 
did not travel to learn constancy nor tranquillity ; 
nor that, secured from harm, you might complain of 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. OTT 


no one, accuse no one; that no one might injure 
you; and that thus you might preserve your human 
relations, without impediment. You have made a 
fine traffic of it, to carry home hypothetical argu- 
ments and convertible propositions! If you please, 
too, sit in the market, and cry them for sale, as 
mountebanks do their medicines. Why will you not 
rather deny that you know even what you have 
learned; for fear of bringing a scandal upon such 
theorems as useless? What harm has philosophy 
done you, —in what has Chrysippus injured you, — 
that you should demonstrate by ‘your actions that 
such studies are of no value? Had you not evils 
enough at home? How many causes for grief and 
lamentation had you there, even if you had not trav- 
elled? But you have added more; and, if you ever 
get any new acquaintance and friends, you will find 
fresh causes for groaning; and, in like manner, if 
you attach yourself to any other country. To what 
purpose, therefore, do you live? To heap sorrow 
upon sorrow, to make you wretched? And then you 
tell me this is affection. What affection, man? If 
it be good, it cannot be the cause of any ill; if ill, I 
will have nothing to do with it. I was born for my 
own good, not ill. 

“What, then, is the proper training for these 
cases ?” 

First, the highest and principal means, and as obvi- 
ous as if at your very door, is this, — that when you 
attach yourself to anything, it may not be as toa 
secure possession. 

“ How then ? ” 

As to something brittle as glass or earthenware; 
that, when it happens to be broken, you may not lose 


278 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


your self-command. So here, too; when you em- 
brace your child, or your brother, or your friend, 
never yield yourself wholly to the fair semblance, nor 
let the passion pass into excess; but curb it, restrain 
it, — like those who stand behind triumphant victors, 
and remind them that they are men. Do you like- 
wise remind yourself that you love what is mortal ; 
that you love what is not your own. It is allowed 
you for the present, not irrevocably, nor forever ; 
but as a fig, or a bunch of grapes, in the appointed 
season. If you long for these in winter you are fool- 
ish. So, if you long for your son, or your friend, 
when you cannot have him, remember that you are 
wishing for figs in winter. For as winter is to a fig, 
so is every accident in the universe to those things 
with which it interferes. In the next place, what- 
ever objects give you pleasure, call before yourself the 
opposite images. What harm is there, while you 
kiss your child, in saying softly, “To-morrow you 
may die”; and so to your friend, “ To-morrow either 
you or I may go away, and we may see each other 
no more.” 

“ But these sayings are ominous.” 

And so are some incantations; but, because they 
are useful, I do not mind it; only let them be useful. 
But do you call anything ominous except what im- 
plies some ill?- Cowardice is ominous; baseness is 
ominous; lamentation, grief, shamelessness. These 
are words of bad omen; and yet we ought not to 
shrink from using them, as a guard against the things 
they mean. But do you tell me that a word is omi- 
nous which is significant of anything natural? Say, 
too, that it is ominous for ears of corn to be reaped ; 
for this signifies the destruction of the corn; but not 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 279 


of the world. Say, too, that the fall of the leaf is 
ominous; and that confectionery should be produced 
from figs, and raisins from grapes. For all these are 
changes from a former state into another ; not a de- 
struction, but a certain appointed economy and admin- 
istration. Such is absence, a slight change; such is 
death, a greater change ; not from what now is noth- 
ing, but to what now is not. 
“ What, then, shall I be no more?” 

_ True; but you will be something else, of which at 
present the world has no need; for even you were 
not produced when you pleased, but when the world 
had need of you. Hence a wise and good man, mind- 
ful who he is and whence he came, and by whom he 
was produced, is attentive only how he may fill his 
post regularly and dutifully before God. “ Dost 
Thou wish me still to live? Let me live free and 
noble, as Thou desirest; for Thou hast made me 
incapable of restraint in what is my own. But hast 
Thou no farther use for me? Farewell! I have 
staid thus Jong through Thee alone, and no other; 
and now I depart in obedience to Thee.” —“ How 
do you depart ?”? —“ Still as Thou wilt ; as one free, 
as thy servant, as one sensible of thy commands and 
thy prohibitions. But, while I am employed in thy 
service, what wouldst Thou have me tobe? A prince, 
or a private man; a senator, or a plebeian ; a soldier, 
‘or a general; a preceptor, or a master of a family? 
Whatever post or rank Thou shalt assign me, — like 
Socrates, I will die a thousand times rather than 
desert it. Where wouldst thou have me to be? At 
Rome, or at Athens; at Thebes, or at Gyaros? Only 
remember me there. If Thou shalt send me where 
men cannot live conformably to nature, I will not 


280 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


depart unbidden, but upon a recall as it were sounded 
by Thee. Even then I do not desert Thee; Heaven 
forbid! but I perceive that Thou hast no use for mé. 
If a life conformable to nature be granted, I will se 
no other place but that in which I am; nor any other 
company but those with whom I dwell.” 

Let these things be ready at hand, night a 
day. These things write; these things read; 0 
these things talk both to yourself and others. [As 
them,] “‘ Have you any assistance to give me for thi 
purpose?” Arid, again, go and ask another an 
another. Then, if any of those things should hap- 
pen that are called disagreeable, this will surely be\ 
a relief to you; in the first place, that it was not 
unexpected. For it is much to be able always to 
say, “‘I knew that I begot one born to die.” * Thus 
do you say too, “JI knew that I was liable to die, to 
travel, to be exiled, to be imprisoned.” If after- 
wards you turn to yourself, and seek from what quar- 
ter the event proceeds, you will presently recollect: 
“Té is from things uncontrollable by will, not from 
what is my own. What then is it to me?” Then, 
farther, which is the chief point: “ Who sent this? 
The commander, the general, the city, the public 
law? Give it to me, then, for I must always obey 
the law in all things.” 

Farther yet; when any delusive appearance molests 
you (for this may not depend on you,) strive against 
it, and conquer it through reason. Do not suffer it 
to gain strength, nor to lead you indefinitely on, 
beguiling you at its own will. If you are at Gyaros, 
do not represent to yourself the manner of living at 


* This was said by Xenophon, when news was brought him that 
his son Gryllus was killed in a battle. —C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 281 


Rome; how many pleasures you used to find there, 
and how many would attend your return; but dwell 
rather on this point; how he, who must live at Gya- 
ros, may live there nobly. And if you are at Rome, 
do not represent to yourself the manner of living at 
Athens; but consider only how you ought to live 
where you are. 

Lastly, for all other pleasures substitute the con- 
ciousness that you are obeying God, and performing 
not in word, but in deed, the duty of a wise and good 
man. How great a thing is it to be able to say to 
yourself: “ What others are now solemnly arguing 
in the schools, and can state in paradoxes, this I put 
in practice. Those qualities which are there dis- 
coursed, disputed, celebrated, I have made mine own. 
Zeus hath been pleased to let me recognize this with- 
in myself, and himself to discern whether he hath in 
me one fit for a soldier and a citizen, and to employ 
me as a witness to other men, concerning things un- 
controllable by will. See that your fears were vain, 
your appetites vain. Seek not good from without: 
seek it within yourselves, or you will never find it. 
For this reason he now brings me hither, now sends 
me thither ; sets me before mankind, poor, powerless, 
sick; banishes me to Gyaros; leads me to prison; 
not that he hates me,— Heaven forbid! For who 
hates the most faithful of his servants? Nor that he 
neglects me, for he neglects not one of the smallest 
things; but to exercise me, and make use of me as a 
witness to others. Appointed to such a service, do I 
still care where I am, or with whom, or what is said 
of me,—instead of being wholly attentive to God 
and to his orders and commands ? ” 

Having these principles always at hand, and prac- 


282 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


tising them by yourself, and making them ready for 
use, you will never want any one to comfort and 
strengthen you. For shame does not consist in hav- 
ing nothing to eat, but in not having wisdom enough 
to exempt you from fear and sorrow. But if you 
once acquire that exemption, will a tyrant, or his 
guards, or courtiers, be anything to you? Will offi- 
ces or office-seekers disturb you, who have received 
so great a command from Zeus? Only do not make 
a parade over it, nor grow insolent upon it. But 
show it by your actions; and though no one else 
should notice it, be content that you are well and 
blessed. 


CHAPTER XXV. 
CONCERNING THOSE WHO WAVER IN THEIR PURPOSE. 


ONSIDER which of your undertakings you have 

fulfilled, which not, and wherefore; which give 
you pleasure, which pain, in the reflection; and, if 
possible, recover yourself where you have failed. For 
the champions in this greatest of combats must not 
grow weary; but should even contentedly bear chas- 
tisement. For this is no combat of wrestling or box- 
ing, where both he who succeeds and he who fails 
may possibly be of very great worth or of little ; in- 
deed may be very fortunate or very miserable; but 
this combat is for good fortune and happiness itself. 
What is the case, then? Here even if we have re- 
nounced the contest, no one restrains us from renew- 
ing it; nor need we wait for another four years for 
the return of another Olympiad; but recollecting 
and recovering yourself, and returning with the same 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 283 


zeal, you may renew it immediately ; and even if you 
should again yield, you may again begin; and if you 
once get the victory, you become like one who has 
never yielded. Only do not begin, by forming the habit 
of this, to do it with pleasure, and then, like quails 
that have fled the fighting-pit, go about as if you 
were a brave champion, although you have been con- 
quered throughout all the games. “I am conquered 
in presence of a girl. But what of it? Ihave been 
thus conquered before.” — “I am excited to wrath 
against some one. ButI have been in anger before.” 
You talk to us just as if you had come off unburt. 
As if one should say to his physician, who had for- 
bidden him to bathe, ‘‘ Why, did not I bathe before?” 
Suppose the physician should answer him, “ Well, 
and what was the consequence of your bathing? 
Were you not feverish? Had you not the head- 
ache?” So, when you before railed at somebody, 
did you not act like an ill-natured person; like an 
impertinent one? Have not you fed this habit of 
yours by corresponding actions? When you were 
conquered by a pretty girl, did you come off with 
impunity? Why, then, do you talk of what you 
have done before? You ought to remember it, I 
think, as slaves do whipping, so as to refrain from 
the same faults. ‘‘ But the case is unlike; for there 
it is pain that causes the remembrance: but what is 
the pain, what the punishment, of my committing 
these faults? For when was I ever thus trained to 
the avoidance of bad actions?” Yet the pains of 
experience, whether we will or not, have their bene- 
ficial influence. 


284 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER XXVI. 
CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE IN DREAD OF WANT. 


RE not you ashamed to be more fearful and 
mean-spirited than fugitive slaves? To what 
estates, to what servants, do they trust, when they 
run away and leave their masters? Do they not, 
after carrying off a little with them for the first days, 
travel over land and sea, contriving first one, then 
another method of getting food? And what fugitive 
ever died of hunger? But you tremble, and lie 
awake at night, for fear you should want necessaries. 
Foolish man! are you so blind? Do not you see the 
way whither the want of necessaries leads ? 

“ Why, whither does it lead ?”’ 

Whither a fever, or a falling stone may lead, — to 
death. Have you not, then, often said this to your 
companions? Have you not read, have you not 
written, many things on this point? And how often 
have you arrogantly boasted that you are undisturbed 
by fears of death. 

“ Ay; but my family, too, will perish with hun- 

er.” 
: What then? Does their hunger lead any other 
way than yours? Is there not the same descent? 
The same state below? Will you not then, in every 
want and necessity, look with confidence there, where 
even the most rich and powerful, and kings and ty- 
rants themselves, must descend? You indeed may 
descend hungry, perhaps; and they, full of indiges- 
tion and drunkenness. For shave you often seen a 
beggar who did not live to old age, nay, to extreme 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 285 


old age? Chilled by day and night, lying on the 
ground, and eating only what is barely necessary, 
they yet seem almost to become incapable of dying. 
But cannot you write? Cannot you keepa school ? 
Cannot you be a watchman at somebody’s door ? 

“ But it is shameful to come to this necessity.” 

First, therefore, learn what things are shameful, 
and then claim to be a philosopher; but at present 
do not suffer even another to call you so. Is that 
shameful to you which is not your own act? Of 
which you are not the cause? Which has happened 
to you by accident, like a fever or the head-ache ? 
If your parents were poor, or left others their heirs, 
or though living, do not assist you, are these things 
shameful for you? Is this what you have learned 
from the philosophers? Have you never heard that 
what is shameful is blamable; and what is blama- 
ble must be something which deserves to be blamed ? 
Whom do you.blame for an action not his own, which 
he has not himself performed? Did you, then, make 
your father such as he is? Or is it in your power to 
mend him? Is that permitted you? What, then, 
must you desire what is not permitted; and when 
you fail of it be ashamed? Are you thus accus- 
tomed, even when you are studying philosophy, to 
depend on others, and to hope nothing from your- 
self? Sigh, then, and groan and eat in fear that you 
shall have no food to-morrow. Tremble, lest your 
servants should rob you, or run away from you, or 
die. Thus live on forever, whoever you are, who have 
applied yourself to philosophy in name only, and as 
much as in you lies have disgraced its principles, by 
showing that they are unprofitable and useless to 
those who profess them. You have never made con- 


286 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


stancy, tranquillity, and serenity the object of your 
desires; have sought no teacher for this knowledge, 
but many for mere syllogisms. -You have never, by 
yourself, confronted some delusive semblance with — 
“Can I bear this, or can I not bear it? What re- 
mains for me to do?” But, as if all your affairs 
went safe and well, you have aimed only to secure 
yourself in your present possessions. What are they ? 
Cowardice, baseness, worldliness, desires unaccom- 
plished, unavailing aversions. These are the things 
which you have been laboring to secure. Ought you 
not first to have acquired something by the use of . 
reason, and then to have provided security for that? 
Whom did you ever see building a series of battle- 
ments without placing them upon a wall? And what 
porter is ever set, where there is no door? But you 
study! Can you show me what you study ? 

* Not to be shaken by sophistry.” 

Shaken from what? Show me first, what you 
have in your custody; what you measure, or what 
you weigh; and then accordingly show me your 
weights and measures; and to what purpose- you 
measure that which is but dust. Ought you not to 
show what makes men truly happy, what makes their 
affairs proceed as they wish? How we may blame 
no one, accuse no one; how acquiesce in the admin- 
istration of the universe? Show me these things. 
“See, Ido show them,” say you; “I will solve syl- 
logisms to you.” This is but the measure, O unfor- 
tunate! and not the thing measured. Hence you 
now pay the penalty due for neglecting philosophy. 
You tremble, you lie awake; you advise with every- 
body, and if the result of the advice does not please 
everybody, you think that you have been ill-advised. 


- THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 287 


Then you dread hunger, as you fancy ; yet it is not 
hunger that you dread; but you are afraid that you 
will not have some one to cook for you; some one 
else for a butler; another to pull off your shoes; a 
fourth to dress you; others to rub you; others to fol- 
low you: that when you have undressed yourself in 
the bathing-room, and stretched yourself out, like a 
man crucified, you may be rubbed here and there; 
and the attendant may stand by, and say, ‘ Come 
this way; give your side; take hold of his head ; 
turn your shoulder”; and that when you are re- 
turned home from the bath you may cry out, “‘ Does 
nobody bring anything to eat?’ And then, “ Take 
away ; wipe the table.” This is your dread, that you 
will not be able to lead the life of a sick man. But 
learn the life of those in health ; how slaves live, how 
laborers, how those who are genuine philosophers ; 
how Socrates lived, even with a wife and children; 
how Diogenes ; how Cleanthes, at once studying and 
drawing water [for his livelihood]. If these are the 
things you would have, you can possess them every- 
where, and with.a fearless confidence. 

“Tn what?” 

In the only thing that can be confided in; in what 
is sure; incapable of being restrained or taken away ; 
your own will. 

But why have- you contrived to make yourself so 
useless and good for nothing, that nobody will receive 
you into his house; nobody take care of you: but 
although, if any sound useful vessel be thrown out of 
doors, whoever finds it will take it up and prize it as 
something gained ; yet nobody will take you up, but 
everybody esteem you a loss. What, cannot you so 
rouch as perform the office of a dog or a cock? Why, 


288 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. ° 


then, do you wish to live any longer if you are so 
worthless ? Does any good man fear that food should 
fail him? It does not fail the blind; it does not fail 
the lame. Shall it fail a good man? A paymaster 
is always to be found for a soldier, or a laborer, or a 
shoemaker, and shall one be wanting to a good man ? 
Is God so negligent of his own institutions, of his ser- 
vants, of his witnesses, whom alone he uses for exam- 
ples to the uninstructed, to show that He exists, and 
that he administers the universe rightly, and doth not 
neglect human affairs; and that no evil can happen 
to a good man, either living or dead? What, then, 
is the case, when he doth not bestow food? What 
else than that, like a good general, he hath made me 
a signal of retreat? I obey, I follow; speaking well 
of my leader, praising his works. For I came when 
it seemed good to him, and, again, when it seems 
good to him, I depart; and in life it was my business 
to praise God within myself and to every auditor, and 
to the world. Doth he grant me but few things? 
Doth he refuse me affluence? It isnot his pleasure 
that I should live luxuriously; for he did not grant 
that even to Hercules, his own son; but another 
reigned over Argos and Mycene, while he obeyed, 
labored, and strove. And Eurystheus was just what 
he was; neither truly king of Argos, nor of Mycene ; 
not being indeed king over himself. But Hercules 
was ruler and governor of the whole earth and seas; 
the expeller of lawlessness and injustice; the intro- 
ducer of justice and sanctity. And this he effected 
naked and alone. Again; when Ulysses was ship- 
wrecked and cast away, did his helpless condition at 
all deject him? Did it break his spirit? No: but 
how did he go to Nausicaa and her attendants, to ask 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS, 289 


those necessaries which it seems most shameful to 
‘beg from another ? 


« As some lion, bred in the monntains, confiding in strength.” * 


Confiding in what? Not in glory, or in riches, or in 
dominion, but in his own strength; that is, in his 
knowledge of what is within him and without him. 
For this alone is what can render us free and incapa- 
ble of restraint; can raise the heads of the humble, 
and make them look, with unaverted eyes, full in the 
face of the rich and of the tyrants; and this is what 
philosophy bestows. But you will not even set forth 
with confidence ; but all trembling about such trifles 
as clothes and plate. Foolish man! have you thus 
wasted your time till now? 

* But what if I should be sick ?” 

It will then be for the best that you should be sick. 

“Who will take care of me?” 

God and-your friends. 

“T shall lie in a hard bed.” 

But like a man. 

“T shall not have a convenient room.” 

Then you will be sick in an inconvenient one. 

“Who will provide food for me?” 

They who provide for others, too ; you will be sick 
like Manes.t 

“ But what will be the conclusion of my sickness? 
Any other than death?” 

Why, do you not know, then, that the origin of all 
human evils, and of baseness, and cowardice, is not 


* Homer, Odyssey, VI. 130.— H. 

t The name of a slave, particularly of a slave who once belonged 
to Diogenes; and perhaps this expression alludes to some story 
about him, which is now unknown. —C. 

19 


290 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


death ; but rather the fear of death? Fortify your- 
self, therefore, against this. Hither let all your dis- 
courses, readings, exercises, tend. And then you will 
know that thus alone are men made free. 


BOOK IV. 


CHAPTER I. 
OF FREEDOM, 


E is free who lives as he likes; who is not sub- 
ject to compulsion, to restraint, or to violence ; 
whose pursuits are unhindered, his desires successful, 
his aversions unincurred. Who, then, would wish 
to lead a wrong course of life? “No one.” Who 
would live deceived, erring, unjust, dissolute, discon- 
tented, dejected? ‘No one.” No wicked man, then, 
lives as he likes ; therefore no such man is free. And 
who would live in sorrow, fear, envy, pity, with dis- 
appointed desires and unavailing aversions? ‘No 
one.” Do we then find any of the wicked exempt 
from these evils? “Not one.” Consequently, then, 
they are not free. 

If some person who has been twice consul should 
hear this, he will forgive you, provided you add, “ but 
you are wise, and this has no reference to you.” But 
if you tell him the truth, that, in point of slavery, he 
does not necessarily differ from those who have been 
thrice sold, what but chastisement can you expect? 
‘‘ For how,”’ he says, “‘amIa slave? My father was 
free, my mother free. Besides, I am a senator, too, 
and the friend of Cesar, and have been twice consul, 
and have myself many slaves.” In the first place, 
most worthy sir, perhaps your father too was a slave 
of the same kind ; and your mother, and your grand- 
father, and all your series of ancestors. But even 


292 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


were they ever so free, what is that to you? For 
what if they were of a generous, you of a mean spirit ; 
they brave, and you a coward; they sober, and you 
dissolute ? 

“ But what,” he says, “‘ has this to do with my being 
a slave.” Is it no part of slavery to act against your 
will, under compulsion, and lamenting? “ Be it so. 
But who can compel me but the master of all, Cx- 
sar?”’ By your own confession, then, you have one 
master ; and let not his being, as you say, master of 
all, give you any comfort; for then you are merely 
a slave in a large family. Thus the Nicopolitans, 
too, frequently cry out, ‘“ By the genius of Cesar we 
are free !”’ 

For the present, however, if you please, we will let 
Cesar alone. But tell me this. Have you never 
been in love with any one, either of a servile or lib- 
eral condition? ‘Why, what has that to do with 
being slave or free?” Were you never commanded 
anything by your mistress that you did not choose? 
Have you never flattered your fair slave? Have you 
never kissed her feet? And yet if you were com- 
manded to kiss Cesar’s feet, you would think it an 
outrage and an excess of tyranny. What else is this 
than slavery? Have you never gone out by night 
where you did not desire? Have you never spent 
more than you chose? Have you not sometimes 
uttered your words with sighs and groans? Have 
you never borne to be reviled and shut out of doors? 
But if you are ashamed to confess your own follies, 
see what Thrasonides * says, and does; who, after 
having fought more battles perhaps than you, went 


* A character in one of the Comedies of Menander, called The 
Hated Lover. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 293 


out by night, when [his slave] Geta would not dare to 
go; nay, had he been compelled to do it by him, 
would have gone bewailing and lamenting the bitter- 
ness of servitude. And what says he afterwards ? 
“A contemptible girl has enslaved me, whom no 
enemy ever enslaved.”” Wretch! to be the slave of 
a girl and a contemptible girl too! Why, then, do 
you still call yourself free? Why do you boast your’ 
military expeditions? Then he calls for a sword, 
and is angry with the person who, out of kindness, 
denies it; and sends presents to her who hates him; 
and begs, and weeps, and then again is elated on 
every little success. But what elation? Is he raised 
above desire or fear ? 

Consider in animals what is our idea of freedom. 
Some keep tame lions, and feed them and even lead 
them about; and who will say that any such lion is 
free? Nay, does he not live the more slavishly the 
more he lives at ease? And who that had sense and 
reason would wish to be one of those lions? Again, 
how much will caged birds suffer in trying to escape ? 
Nay, some of them starve themselves rather than un- 
dergo such a life; others are saved only with diff- 
culty aud in a pining condition; and the moment 
they find any opening, out they go. Such a desire 
have they for their natural freedom, and to be at their 
own disposal, and unrestrained. ‘And what harm 
can this confinement do you ?”? — “ What say you? 
I was born to fly where I please, to live in the open 
air, to sing when I please. You deprive me of all 
this, and then ask, what harm I suffer?” 

Hence we will allow those only to be free who will 
not endure captivity ; but so soon as they are taken, 
die and so escape. Thus Diogenes somewhere says 


294 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


that the only way to freedom is to die with ease. 
And he writes to the Persian king,“ You can no 
more enslave the Athenians than you can fish.” — 
“How? Can I not get possession of them?” — “If 
you do,”’ said he, ‘“‘ they will leave you, and be gone 
like fish. For catch a fish, and it dies. And if the 
Athenians, too, die as soon as you have caught them, 
of what use are your warlike preparations?” This 
is the voice of a free man who had examined the 
matter in earnest; and, as it might be expected, 
found it all out. But if you seek it where it is not, 
what wonder if you never find it? 

A slave wishes to be immediately set free. Think 
you it is because he is desirous to pay his fee [of 
manumission] to the officer? No, but because he 
fancies that, for want of acquiring his freedom, he 
has hitherto lived under restraint and unprosper- 
ously. “If I am once set free,” he says, “it is all 
prosperity ; I care for no one; I can speak to all as 
being their equal and on a level with them. I go 
where I will, J come when and how I will.” He is 
at last made free, and presently having nowhere to 
eat he seeks whom he may flatter, with whom he 
may sup. He then either submits to the basest and 
most infamous degradation ; and if hte can obtain ad- 
mission to some great man’s table, falls into a slavery 
much worse than the former; or perhaps, if the 
ignorant fellow should grow rich, he doats upon some 
girl, laments, and is unhappy, and wishes for slavery 
again. “For what harm did it do me? Another 
clothed me, another shod me, another fed me, an- 
other took care of me when I was sick. It was but 
in a few things, by way of return, I used to serve him. 
But now, miserable wretch! what do I suffer, in be- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 295 


ing a slave to many, instead of one! Yet, if I can 
be promoted to equestrian rank, I shall live in the 
utmost prosperity and happiness.” In order to ob- 
tain this, he first deservedly suffers ; and as soon as 
he has obtained it, it is all the same again. “ But, 
then,” he says, “if I do but get a military command, 
I shall be delivered from all my troubles.” He gets 
a military command. He suffers as much as the 
vilest rogue of a slave ; and, nevertheless, he asks for 
@ second command, and a third; and when he has 
put the finishing touch, and is made a senator, then 
he is a slave indeed. When he comes into the pub- 
lic assembly, it is then that he undergoes his finest 
and most splendid slavery. 

[It is needful] not to be foolish, but to learn what 
Socrates taught, the nature of things ; and not rashly 
to apply general principles to particulars. For the 
cause of all human evils is the not being able to apply 
general principles to special cases. But different peo- 
ple have different grounds of complaint; one, for in- 
stance, that he is sick. That is not the trouble, it is in 
his principles. Another, that he is poor ; another, that 
he has a harsh father and mother; another, tliat he is 
not in the good graces of Cesar. This is nothing else 
but not understanding how to apply our principles. 
For who has not an idea of evil, that it is hurtful ? 
That it is to be avoided? That it is by all means to 
be prudently guarded against? One principle does 
not contradict another, except when it comes to be ap- 
plied. What, then, is this evil, — thus hurtful and to 
be avoided? ‘Not to be the friend of Cesar,” says 
some one. He is gone; he has failed in applying his 
principles ; he is embarrassed ; he seeks what is noth- 
ing to the purpose. For if he comes to be Casar’s 


296 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


friend, he is still no nearer to what he sought. For 
what is it that every man seeks? To be secure, to 
be happy, to do what he pleases without restraint and 
without compulsion. When he becomes the friend 
of Caesar, then does he cease to be restrained? To 
be compelled? Is he secure? Is he happy? Whom 
shall we ask ? Whom can we better credit than this 
very man who has been his friend? Come forth and 
tell us whether you sleep more quietly now than be- 
fore you were the friend of Cesar? You presently 
hear him cry, “ Leave off, for Heaven’s sake, and do 
not insult me. You know not the miseries I suffer; 
there is no sleep for me; but one comes and says 
that Cesar is already awake ; another, that he is just 
going out. Then follow perturbations, then cares.” 
Well; and when did you use to sup the more pleas- 
antly,— formerly, or now? Hear what he says about 
this, too. When he is not invited, he is distracted ; 
and if he is, he sups like a slave with his master, 
solicitous all the while not to say or do anything 
foolish. And what think you? Is he afraid of being 
whipped like a slave? No such easy penalty. No; 
but rather, as becomes so great a man, Cesar’s friend, 
of losing his head. And when did you bathe the 
more quietly ; when did you perform your exercises 
the more at your leisure; in short, which life would 
you rather wish to live, your present, or the former ? 
I could swear there-is no one so stupid and insensible 
as not to deplore his miseries, in proportion as he is 
the more the friend of Cesar. 

Since, then, neither they who are called kings nor 
the friends of kings live as they like, who, then, after 
all, is free? Seek, and you will find; for you are 
furnished by nature with means for discovering the 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 297 


truth. But if you are not able by these alone to find 
the consequence, hear them who have sought it. 
What do they say? Do you think freedom a good ? 
“ The greatest.” Can any one, then, who attains the 
greatest good, be unhappy or unsuccessful in his 
affairs? “No.” As many, therefore, as you see 
unhappy, lamenting, unprosperous, — confidently pro- 
nounce them not free. “Ido.” Henceforth, then, 
we have done with buying and selling, and such like 
stated conditions of becoming slaves. For if these: 
concessions hold, then, whether the unhappy man be: 
a great or a little king,— of consular or bi-consular' 
dignity, — he is not free. ‘Agreed.’ 

Further, then, answer me this; do you think free-. 
dom to be something great and noble and valuable ? 
“ How should I not?” Is it possible, then, that he 
who acquires anything so great and valuable and 
noble should be of an abject spirit? “It is not.” 
‘Whenever, then, you see any one subject to another, 
and flattering him contrary to his own opinion, confi- 
dently say that he too is not free ; and not only when 
he does this for a supper, but even if it be for a gov- 
ernment, nay, a consulship. Call those indeed little 
slaves who act thus for the sake of little things; and 
call the others as they deserve, great slaves. “Be 
this, too, agreed.” Well; do you think freedom 
to be something independent and self-determined ? 
‘¢ How can it be otherwise?” Him, then, whom it 
is in the power of another to restrain or to compel, 
affirm confidently to be by no means free. And do 
not heed his grandfathers or great-grandfathers ; or 
inquire whether he has been bought or sold; but if 
you hear him say from his heart and with emotion, 
“my master,” though twelve Lictors should march 


298 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


before him, call him a slave. And if you should hear 
him say, “ Wretch, that I am! what do I suffer!” 
call him a slave. In short, if you see him wailing, 
complaining, unprosperous, call him a slave, even in 
purple. 

“ Suppose, then, that he does nothing of all this.” 
Do not yet say that he is free ; but learn whether his 
principles are in any event liable to compulsion, to 
restraint, or disappointment; and if you find this to 
be the case, call him a slave, keeping holiday during 
the Saturnalia. Say that his master is abroad; that 
he will come presently; and you will know what 
he suffers. ‘“ Who will come?” Whoever has the 
power either of bestowing or of taking away any of 
the things he desires. 

“Have we so many masters, then?” We have. 
For, prior to all such, we have the things themselves 
for our masters. Now they are many; and it is 
through these that the men who control the things 
inevitably become our masters too. For no one fears 
Cesar himself; but death, banishment, confiscation, 
prison, disgrace. Nor does any one love Cesar unless 
he be a person of great worth ; but we love riches, the 
tribunate, the pretorship, the consulship. When we 
love or hate or fear such things, they who have the 
disposal of them must necessarily be our masters. 
Hence we even worship them as gods. For we con- 
sider that whoever has the disposal of the greatest ad- 
vantages is a deity; and then further reason falsely, 
“but such a one has the control of the greatest ad- 
vantages ; therefore he is a deity.” For if we reason 
falsely, the final inference must be also false. 

What is it, then, that makes a man free and inde 
pendent? For neither riches, nor consulship, nor 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 299 


the command of provinces, nor of kingdoms, can 
make him so; but something else must be found.” 
What is it that keeps any one from being hindered 
and restrained in penmanship, for instance? ‘ The 
science of penmanship.” In music? “ The science 
of music.” Therefore in life too, it must be the sci 
ence of living. As you have heard it in general, then, 
consider it likewise in particulars. Is it possible for 
him to be unrestrained who desires any of those things 
that are within the power of others? “No.” Can 
he avoid being hindered? “No.” ‘Therefore nei- 
ther can he be free. Consider, theu, whether we 
have nothing or everything in our own sole power, — 
or whether some things are in our own power and 
some in that of others. “ What do you mean?” 
When you would have your body perfect, is it in your 
own power, or is it not? “It is not.” When you 
would be healthy? “It is not.” When you would 
be handsome? “It is not.” When you would live 
or die? “It is not.” Body then is not our own; 
but is subject to everything that proves stronger than 
itself. “Agreed.” Well; is it in your own power 
to have an estate when you please, and such a one 
as you please? “No.” Slaves? “No.” Clothes ? 
“No.” A house? “No.” Horses? “Indeed none 
of these.” Well; if you desire ever so earnestly to 
have your children live, or your wife, or your brother, 
or your friends, is it in your own power? “No, it is 
not.” 

Will you then say that there is nothing indepen- 
dent, which is in your own power alone, and unalien- 
able? See if you have anything of this sort. ‘TI do 
not know.” But, consider it thus: can any one 
make you assent to a falsehood? “No one.” In 


300 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


the matter of assent, then, you are unrestrained and 
unhindered. “Agreed.” Well, and can any one 
compel you to exert your aims towards what you do 
not like? ‘He can. For when he threatens me 
with death, or fetters, he thus compels me.” If, 
then, you were to despise dying or being fettered, 
would you any longer regard him? “No.” Is des- 
pising death, then, an action in our power, or is it 
not? “It is.’ Is it therefore in your power also 
to exert your aims towards anything, or is it not? 
“ Agreed that it is. But in whose power is my avoid- 
ing anything?” This, too, isin your own. ‘“ What 
then if, when I am exerting myself to walk, any one 
should restrain me?” ‘What part of you can he 
restrain? Can he restrain your assent? “No, but 
my body.” Ay, ashe mayastone. “ Beit so. But 
still I cease to walk.”” And who claimed that walk- 
ing was one of the actions that cannot be restrained ? 
For.I only said that your exerting yourself towards 
it could not be restrained. But where there is need 
of body and its assistance, you have already heard 
that nothing isin your power. “ Be this, too, agreed.” 
And can any one compel you to desire against your 
will? ‘No one.” Or to propose, or intend, or, in 
short, not to be beguiled by the appearances of things? 
“Nor this. But when I desire anything, he can re- 
strain me from obtaining what I desire.” If you 
desire anything that is truly within your reach, and 
that cannot be restrained, how can he restrain you? 
‘“ By no meaus.” And pray who claims that he who 
longs for what depends on another will be free from 
restraint ? 

“ May I not long for health, then ?”? By no means; 
nor anything else that depends on another; for what 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 801 


is not in your own power, either to procure or to pre- 
serve when you will, that belongs to another. Keep 
off not only your hands from it, but even more than 
these, your desires. Otherwise you have given your- 
self up as a slave ; you have put your neck under the 
yoke, if you admire any of the things which are not 
your own, but which are subject and mortal, to which 
of them soever you are attached. “Is not my hand 
myown?” Itisa part of you, but it is by nature clay, 
liable to restraint, to compulsion ; a slave to everything 
stronger than itself. And why do I say, your hand? 
You ought to hold your whole body but as a useful 
ass, with a pack-saddle on, so long as may be, so. long 
as it is allowed you. But if there should come a mil- 
itary conscription, and a soldier should lay hold on 
it, let it go. Do not resist, or murmur; otherwise 
you will be first beaten and lose the ass after all. 
And since you are thus to regard even the body itself, 
think what remains to do concerning things to be- pro- 
vided for the sake of the body. If that be an ass, the 
rest are but bridles, pack-saddles, shoes, oats, hay, for 
him. Let these go, too. Quit them yet more easily 
and expeditiously. And when you are thus prepared 
and trained to distinguish what belongs to others 
from your own, what is liable to restraint from what 
is not; to esteem the one your own property, but not 
the other ; to keep your desire, to keep your aversion 
carefully regulated by this point; whom have you 
any longer to fear? “No one.” For about what 
should you be afraid? About what is your own, in 
which consists the essence of good and evil? And 
who has any power over this? Who can take it 
away? Who can hinder you, any more than God 
can be hindered. But are you afraid for body, for 


802 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


possessions, for what belongs to others, for what is 
nothing to you? And what have you been studying 
all this while, but to distinguish between your own 
and that which is not your own; what is in your 
power and what is not in your power; what is liable 
to restraint and what is not? And for what purpose 
have you applied to the philosophers? That you 
might nevertheless be disappointed and unfortunate ? 
No doubt you will be exempt from fear and pertur- 
bation! And what is grief to you? For whatsoever 
we anticipate with fear, we endure with grief. And 
for what will you any longer passionately wish ? For 
you have a temperate and steady desire of things de- 
pendent on will, since they are accessible and desira- 
ble; and you have no desire of things uncontrollable 
by will, so as to leave room for that irrational, and 
impetuous, and precipitate passion. 

Since then you are thus affected with regard to 
things, what man can any longer be formidable to 
you? What has man that he can be formidable 
to man, either in appearance, or speech, or mutual 
intercourse? No more than horse to horse, or dog 
to dog, or bee to bee. But things are formidable to 
every one, and whenever any person can either give 
these to another, or take them away, he becomes for- 
midable too. ‘“ How, then, is this citadel to he de- 
stroyed?’? Not by sword or fire, but by principle. 
For if we should demolish the visible citadel, shall 
we have demolished also that of some fever, of some 
fair woman, in short, the citadel [of temptation] 
within oursélves; and have turned out the tyrants 
to whom we are subject upon all occasions and every 
day, sometimes the same, sometimes others? From 
hence we must begin; hence demolish the citadel, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 3803 


and turn out the tyrants ; — give up body, members, 
riches, power, fame, magistracies, honors, children, 
brothers, friends; esteem all these as belonging to 
others. And if the tyrants be turned out from hence, 
why should I besides demolish the external citadel, 
at least on my own account? For what harm to 
me from its standing? Why should I turn out the 
guards? For in what point do they affect me? It is 
against others that they direct their fasces, their 
staves, and their swords. Have I ever been re- 
strained from what I willed, or compelled against my 
will? Indeed, how is this possible? I have placed 
my pursuits under the direction of God. Is it His 
will that I should have a fever? It is my will too. 
Is it His will that I should pursue anything? It is 
my will, too. Is it His will that I should desire? 
Itis my will too. Is it His will that I should obtain 
anything? Itis mine too. Is it not His will? It 
is not mine. Is it His will that I should be tortured ? 
Then it is my will to be tortured. Is it His will that 
I should die? Then it is my will to die. Who can 
any longer restrain or compel me, contrary to my 
own opinion? No more than Zeus. 

It is thus that cautious travellers act. Does some 
one hear that the road is beset by robbers? He does 
not set out alone, but waits for the retinue of an am- 
bassador, or questor, or proconsul; and when he has 
joined himself to their company, goes along in safety. 
Thus does the prudent man act in the world. There 
are many robberies, tyrants, storms, distresses, losses 
of things most dear. Where is there any refuge? 
How can he go alone unattacked? What retinue 
can he wait for, to go safely through his journey? 
To what company shall he join himself? To some 


804 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


rich man? To some consular senator? And what 
good will that do me? He may be robbed himself, 
groaning and lamenting. And what if my fellow- 
traveller himself should turn against me and rob 
me? What shall Ido? Isay, I will be the friend 
of Cesar. While Jam his companion, no one will 
injure me. Yet before I can become illustrious 
enough for this, what must I bear and suffer! How 
often, and by how many, must I be robbed! And, 
then, if I do become the friend of Cxsar, he too is 
mortal; and if, by any accident, he should become 
my enemy, where can I best retreat? To a desert? 
Well; and may not a fever come there? What can 
be done then? Is it not possible to find a fellow-tray- 
eller, safe, faithful, brave, incapable of being sur- 
prised? A person who reasons thus, understands 
and considers that, if he joins himself to God, he 
shall go safely through his journey. 

“ How do you mean, join himself?” That what 
ever is the will of God may be Ave will too: that 
whatever is not the will of God may not be his. 
* How, then, can this be done?”’ Why, how other- 
wise than by considering the workings of God’s power 
and his administration? What has he given me to 
be my own, and independent ? What has he reserved 
to himself? He has given me whatever depends on 
will. The things within my power he has made in- 
capable of hindrance or restraint. But how could he 
make a body of clay incapable of hindrance? There- 
fore he has subjected possessions, furniture, house, 
children, wife, to the revolutions of the universe. 
Why, then, do I fight against God? Why doI will 
to retain that which depends not on will? That 
which is not granted absolutely; but how? In such 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 805 


a manner, and for such a time as was thought proper. 
But he who gave takes away. Why, then, do I re- 
sist? Besides being a fool, in contending with a 
stronger than myself, I shall be unjust, which is a 
more important consideration. For whence had I 
these things, when I came into the world? My 
father gave them to me. And who gave them to 
him? And who made the sun? Who the fruits? 
Who the seasons? Who their connection and rela- 
tions with each other? And after you have received 
all, and even your very self from another, are you 
angry with the giver; and do you complain if He 
takes anything away from you? Who are you; and 
for what purpose did you come? Was it not He who 
brought you here? Was it not He who showed you 
the light? Hath not He given you companions? 
Hath not He given you senses? Hath not He given 
you reason? And as whom did He bring you here? 
Was it not as a mortal? Was it not as one to live 
with a little portion of flesh upon earth, and to see 
his administration ; to behold the spectacle with Him, 
and partake ofthe festival for a short time? After 
having beheld the spectacle and the solemnity, then, 
as long as it is permitted you, will you not depart 
when He leads you out, adoring and thankful for 
what you have heard and seen? ‘No; but I would 
enjoy the feast still longer.”” So would the initiated 
[in the mysteries], too, be longer in their initiation ; 
so, perhaps, would the spectators at Olympia see more 
combatants. But the solemnity is over. Go away. 
Depart like a grateful and modest person; make 
room for others. Others, too, must be born as you 
were; and when they are born must have a place, 
and habitations, and necessaries. But if the first do 
20 


306 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


not give way, what room is there left? Why are you 
insatiable, unconscionable? Why do you crowd the 
world ? 

“ Ay, but I would have my wife and children with 
me too.” Why, are they yours? Are they not the 
Giver’s? Are they not His who made you also? 
Will you not then quit what belongs to another? 
Will you not yield to your Superior? ‘“ Why, then, 
did he bring me into the world upon these condi- 
tions?” Well; if it is not worth your while, depart. 
He hath no need of a discontented spectator. He 
wants such as will share the festival; make part of 
the chorus; who will extol, applaud, celebrate the 
solemnity. He will not be displeased to see the 
wretched and fearful dismissed from it. For when 
they were present they did not behave as at a festival 
nor fill a proper place, but lamented, found fault with 
the Deity, with their fortune, with their companions. 
They were insensible both oftheir advantages and 
of the powers which they received for far different 
purposes; the powers of magnanimity, nobleness of 
spirit, fortitude, and that which now concerns us, 
freedom. ‘“ For what purpose, then, have I received 
these things??? Touse them. “Howlong?” As 
long as He who lent them pleases. If, then, they 
are not necessary, do not make an idol of them, and 
they will not be so; do not tell yourself that they are 
necessary, when they are not. 

This should be our study from morning till night, 
beginning with the least and frailest things, as with 
earthen-ware, with glass-ware. Afterwards, proceed 
to a suit of clothes, a dog, a horse, an estate; thence 
to yourself, body, members, children, wife, brothers. 
Look everywhere around you, and be able to detach 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 307 


yourself from these things. Correct your principles. 
Permit nothing to cleave to you that is not your own; 
nothing to grow to you that may give you agony 
when it is torn away. And say, when you are daily 
training yourself as you do here, not that you act the 
philosopher, which may be a presumptuous claim, but 
that you are asserting your freedom. For this is true 
freedom. This is the freedom that Diogenes gained 
from Antisthenes; and declared it was impossible 
that he shonld ever after be a slave to any one. 
Hence, when he was taken prisoner, how did he treat 
the pirates? Did he call any of them master? Ido 
not mean the name, for IJ am not afraid of a word, 
but of the disposition from whence the word proceeds. 
How did he reprove them for feeding their prisoners 
ill? How was he sold? Did he seek a master? 
No; but a slave. And when he was sold, how did 
he converse with his lord? He immediately disputed 
with him whether he ought to be dressed or shaved 
in the manner he was; and how he ought to bring 
up his children. And where is the wonder? For 
if the same master had bought some one to instruct 
his children in gymnastic exercises, would he in those 
exercises have treated him as a servant or as a mas- 
ter? And so if he had bought a physician or an 
architect? In every department the skilful must 
necessarily be superior to the unskilful. What else, 
then, can he be but master, who possesses the uni- 
versal knowledge of life? For who is master in a 
ship? The pilot. Why? Because whoever disobeys 
him is a loser. “ But a master can put me in 
chains.” Can he do it then, without being a loser ? 
**{ think not, indeed.”? But because he must be a 
loser, he evidently must not do it; for no one acts 


808 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


unjustly without being a loser. —‘¢ And how does he 
suffer, whe puts his own slave in chains?” What 
think you? From the very fact of chaining him. 
This you yourself must grant, if you would hold to 
the doctrine that man is not naturally a wild, but a 
gentle animal. For when is it that a vine is in a bad 
condition? “ When itis in a condition contrary to 
its nature.” How is it with a cock? ‘The same.” 
It is therefore the same with a man also. What is 
his nature? Tobite, and kick, and throw into prison, 
and cut off heads? No, but to do good, to assist, to 
indulge the wishes of others. Whether you will or 
not, then, he is in a bad condition whenever he acts 
unreasonably. ‘And so was not Socrates in a bad 
condition?” No, but his judges and accusers. “ Nor 
Helvidius, at Rome?” No, but his murderer. “How 
do you talk?’ Why, just as youdo. You do not call 
that cock in a bad condition which is victorious, and 
yet wounded ; but that which is conquered and comes 
off unhurt. Nor do you call a dog happy which nei- 
ther hunts nor toils; but when you see him perspir- 
ing, and distressed, and panting with the chase. In 
what do we talk paradoxes? If we say that the evil 
of everything consists in what is contrary to its na- 
ture, is this a paradox? Do you not say it with re- 
gard to other things? Why, therefore, in the case 
of man alone, do you take a different view? But 
further ; it is no paradox to say that by nature man 
is gentle and social, and faithful. “This is none.’’ 
How then [is it a paradox to say] that, when he is 
whipped, or imprisoned, or beheaded, he is not hurt? 
If he suffers nobly does he not come off even the bet- 
ter anda gainer? But he is the person hurt who 
suffers the most miserable and shameful evils; who, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 309 


instead of a man, becomes a wolf, a viper, or a hor- 
net, 

Come, then; let us recapitulate what has been. 
granted. The man who is unrestrained, who has all 
things in his power as he wills, is free; but he who 
may be restrained, or compelled, or hindered, or 
thrown into any condition against his will, is a slave. 
‘“‘ And who is unrestrained ?’? He who desires none 
of those things that belong to others. “And what 
are those things, which belong to others?” Those 
which are not in our own power, either to have or 
not to have; or to have them thus or so. Body, 
therefore, belongs to another; its parts to another ; 
property to another. If, then, you attach yourself to 
any of these as your own, you will be punished, as he 
deserves who desires what belongs to others. This 
is the way that leads to freedom; this the only deliv- 
erance from slavery; to be able at length to say, from 
the bottom of one’s soul: 


«Conduct me, Zeus, and thou, O destiny, 
Wherever your decrees have fixed my lot.” * 


But what say you, philosopher? A tyrant calls 
upon you to speak something unbecoming you. Will 
you say it, or will you not? “Stay, let me con- 
sider.”’, Would you consider now? And what did 
you use to consider when you were in the schools? 
Did you, not study what things were good and evil, 
and what indifferent? ‘JI did.” Well; and what 
were the opinions which pleased us ?—“‘ That just 
and fair actions were good; unjust and base ones, 
evil.” Is living a good? “No.” Dying, an evil? 

* A Fragment of Cleanthes, before quoted; and given in full in 
Enchiridion, c. 52. — H. 


810 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


“No.” A prison? “No.” And what did a mean 
and dishonest speech, the betraying a friend, or the 
flattering a tyrant, appear to us? “Evils.” Why, 
then, are you still considering, and have not already 
considered and come to a resolution? For what sort 
of a consideration is this: —“ Whether I ought, when 
it is in my power, to procure myself the greatest good, 
instead of procuring myself the greatest evil.” <A 
fine and necessary consideration, truly, and deserv- 
ing mighty deliberation! Why do you trifle with us, 
inan? No one ever needed to consider any such 
point; nor, if you really imagined things fair and 
honest to be good, things base and dishonest to be 
evil, and all other things indifferent, would you ever 
be in such a perplexity as this, or near it; but you 
would presently be able to distinguish by your under- 
standing as you do by your sight. For do you ever 
have to consider whether black is white ; or whether 
light is heavy ? Do you not follow the plain evidence 
of your senses? Why, then, do you say that you are 
now considering whether things indifferent are to be 
avoided, rather than evils? The truth is, you have 
no principles; for things indifferent do not impress 
you as such, but as the greatest evils; and these, on 
the other hand, as things of no importance. 

For thus has been your practice from the first. 
“Where amI? IfIam in the school and there is 
an audience, I talk as the philosophers do. . But if I 
am out of the school, then away with this stuff that 
belongs only to scholars and fools.” This man is 
accused by the testimony of a philosopher, his friend; 
this philosopher turns parasite ; another hires himself 
out for money; a third does that in the very senate. 
When one is not governed by appearances, then his 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 811 


principles speak for themselves. You are a poor cold 
lump of prejudice, consisting of mere phrases, on 
which you hang as by a hair. You should preserve 
yourself firm and practical, remembering that you 
are to deal with real things. In what manner do 
you hear, —I will not say that your child is dead, for 
how could you possibly bear that ?— but that your 
oil is spilled, your wie consumed? Would that 
some one, while you are bawling, would only say this: 
“Philosopher, you talk quite otherwise when in the 
schools. Why do you deceive us? Why, when you 
are a worm, do you call yourselfa man?” I should 
be glad to be near one of these philosophers, while 
he is revelling in debauchery, that I might see how 
he demeans himself, and what sayings he utters; 
whether he remembers the title he bears and the dis- 
courses which he hears, or speaks, or reads. 

“ And what is all this to freedom?” It lies in 
nothing else but this; whether you rich people ap- 
prove or not. “And who is your evidence of this?” 
Who, but yourselves? You who have a powerful 
master, and live by his motion and nod, and faint 
away if he does but look sternly upon you, who pay 
your court to old men and old women, and say, “I 
cannot do this or that, it is not in my power.” Why 
is it not in your power? Did not you just now con- 
tradict me, and say you were free? ‘But Aprylla 
has forbidden me.” Speak the truth, then, slave, 
and do not run away from your masters nor deny 
them, nor dare to assert your freedom, when you 
have so many proofs of your slavery. One might 
indeed find some excuse for a person compelled by 
love to do something contrary to his opinion, even 
when at the same time he sees what is best without 


312 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


having resolution enough to follow it, since he is 
withheld by something overpowering, and in some 
measure divine. But who can bear you, who are in 
love with old men and old women; and perform 
menial offices for them, and bribe them with presents, 
and wait upon them like a slave when they are sick ; 
at the same time wishing they may die, and inquir- 
ing of the physician whether their distemper be yet 
mortal? And again, when for these great and ven- 
erable magistracies and honors you kiss the hands of 
the slaves of others ; so that you are the slave of those 
who are not free themselves! And then you walk 
about in state, a praetor or a consul. Do Inot know 
how you came to be praetor; whence you received 
the consulship; who gave it to you? For my own 
part, I would not even live, if I must live by Felicio’s 
means, and bear his pride and slavish insolence. For 
I know what a slave is, blinded by what he thinks 
good fortune. 

“ Are you free yourself, then?” you may ask. 
By Heaven, I wish and pray for it. But I own I can- 
not yet face my masters. I still pay a regard to my 
body, and set a great value on keeping it whole; 
though, for that matter, it is not whole. But I can 
show you one who was free, that you may no longer 
seek an example. Diogenes was free. ‘How so?” 
Not because he was of free parents, for he was not; 
but because he was so in himself; because he had 
cast away all which gives a handle to slavery; nor 
was there any way of getting at him, nor anywhere 
to lay hold on him, to enslave him. Everything sat 
loose upon him, everything only just hung on. If 
you took hold on his possessions, he would rather let 
them go than follow you for them; if on his leg, he 


' 
y 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 313 


let go his leg; if his body, he let go his body; ac- 
quaintance, friends, country, just the same. For he 
knew whence he had them, and from whom, and 
upon what conditions he received them. But he 
would never have forsaken his true parents, the gods, | 
and his real country [the universe]; nor have suf- 
fered any one to be more dutiful and obedient to 
them than he; nor would any one have died more 
readily for his country than he. For he never had 
to inquire whether he should act for the good of the 
whole universe ; for he remembered that everything 
that exists belongs to that administration, and is com- 
manded by its ruler. Accordingly, see what he him- 
self says and writes. ‘“ Upon this account,” said he, 
*O Diogenes, it is in your power to converse as you 
will with the Persian monarch and with Archidamus, 
king of the Lacedemonians.” Was it because he was 
born of free parents? Or was it because they were 
descended from slaves, that all the Athenians, and 
all the Lacedemonians, and Corinthians, could not 
converse with them as they pleased; but feared and 
paid court to them? Why then is it in your power, 
Diogenes? ‘ Because Ido not esteem this poor body 
as my own. Because I want nothing. Because this, 
and nothing else isa law to me.” These were the 
things that enabled him to be free. 

And that you may not urge that I show you the 
example of a man clear of incumbrances, without a 
wife or children, or country, or friends, or relations, 
to bend and draw him aside ;— take Socrates, and 
consider him, who had a wife and children, but held 
them not as his own; had a country, friends, rela- 
tions, but held them only so long as it was proper, 
and in the manner that was proper; submitting all 

) 


314 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


these to the law and to the obedience due to it. 
Hence, when it was proper to fight, he was the first 
to go out, and exposed himself to danger without the 
least reserve. But when he was sent by the thirty 
tyrants to apprehend Leon,* because he esteemed it a 
base action, he did not even deliberate about it; 
though he knew that, perhaps, he might die for it. 
But what did that signify to him? For it was some- 
thing else that he wanted to preserve, not his mere 
flesh ; but his fidelity, his honor free from attack or 
subjection. And afterwards, when he was to make 
a defence for his life, does he behave like one hav- 
ing children? Or a wife? No; but like a single 
man, And how does he behave, when required 
to drink the poison? When he might escape and 
Crito would have him escape from prison for the 
sake of his children, what says he? Does he esteem 
it a fortunate opportunity? How should he? But 
he considers what is becoming, and neither sees nor 
regards anything else. ‘For I am not desirous,’ he 
says, ‘to preserve this pitiful body; but that part 
which is improved and preserved by justice, and im- 
paired and destroyed by injustice.’ Socrates is not to 
be basely preserved. He who refused to vote for what 
the Athenians commanded; he, who contemned the 
thirty tyrants; he, who held such discourses on vir- 
tue and moral beauty; such a man is not to be pre- 


* Socrates, with four other persons, was commanded by the thirty 
tyrants of Athens to fetch Leon from the isle of Salamis, in order to 
be put to death. His companions execnted their commission; but 
Socrates remained at home, and chose rather to expose his life to the 
fury of the tyrants, than be accessary to the death of an innocent per- 
son. He would most probably have fallen a sacrifice to their ven- 
geance, if the Oligarchy had not shortly after been dissolved. See 
Puato’s Apology. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 815 


served by a base action, but is preserved by dying, 
instead of running away. For even a good actor is 
preserved as such by leaving off when he ought, not 
by going on to act beyond his time. ‘ What then will 
become of your children?” —“IfI had gone away 
into Thessaly, you would have taken care of them; 
and will there be no one to take care of them when 
[am departed to Hades?”?* You see how he ridi- 
cules and plays with death. But ifit had been you 
or I, we should presently have proved by philosophi- 
cal arguments, that those who act unjustly are to be 
repaid in their own way; and should have added, 
“If I escape I shall be of use to many; if I die, to 
none.” Nay, if it had been necessary, we should 
have crept through a mouse-hole to get away. But 
how should we have been of use to any? For where 
must they have dwelt? If we were useful alive, 
should we not be of still more use to mankind by 
dying when we ought and as we ought? And now 
the remembrance of the death of Socrates is not less, 
butyeven more useful to the world than that of the 
things which he did and said when alive. 

Study these points, these principles, these dis- 
courses; contemplate these examples if you would 
be free, if you desire the thing in proportion to its 
value. And where is the wonder that you should 
purchase so good a thing at the price of others, so 
many, and so great? Some hang themselves, others 
break their necks, and sometimes even whole cities 
have been destroyed for that which is reputed free- 
dom; and will not you for the sake of the true and 
secure and inviolable freedom, repay God what he 
hath given when he demands it? Will you not study 


* Plato, Crito. I. 15.—H. 


816 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


not only, as Plato says, how to die, but how to be tor- 
tured and banished and scourged ; and, in short, how 
to give up all that belongs to others. If not, you will 
be a slave among slaves, though you were ten ~thou- 
sand times a consul; and even though you should 
rise to the palace you will never be the less so. And 
you will feel that, though philosophers (as Cleanthes 
says) do, perhaps, talk contrary to common opinion, 
yet it is not contrary to reason. For you will find it 
true, in fact, that the things that are eagerly followed 
and admired are of no use to those who have gained 
them; while they who have not yet gained them im- 
agine that, if they are acquired, every good will come 
along with them; and, then, when they are acquired, 
there is the same feverishness, the same agitation, the 
same nausea, and the same desire for what is absent. 
For freedom is not procured by a full enjoyment of 
what is desired, but by controlling the desire. And 
in order to know that this is true, take the same 
pains about these which you have taken about other 
things. Hold vigils to acquire a set of principles 
that will make you free. Instead of a rich old man 
pay your court to a philosopher. Be seen about his 
doors. You willnot get any disgrace by being seen 
there. You will not return empty or unprofited if 
you go as you ought. However, try at least. The 
trial is not dishonorable. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 817 


CHAPTER II. 
OF COMPLAISANCE. 


O this point you must attend before all others; 
not to be so attached to any one of your former 
acquaintances or friends as to condescend to behavior 
like his; otherwise you will undo yourself. But if 
it comes into your head, “I shall appear odd to him, 
‘and he will not treat me as before,” remember, that 
there is nothing to be had for nothing; nor is it pos- 
sible that he who acts in the same manner as before, 
should not be the same person. Choose, then, wheth- 
er you will be loved by those who formerly loved 
you, and be like your former self; or be better, and 
not meet with the same treatment. For if this is 
preferable, immediately incline altogether this way, 
and let no other kinds of reasoning draw you aside; 
for no one can improve while he is wavering. If, 
then, you prefer this to everything, if you would be 
fixed only on this, and employ all your pains about 
it, give up everything else. Otherwise this waver- 
‘ing will affect you in both ways; you will neither 
noake a due improvement, nor preserve the advan- 
tages you had before. For before, by setting your 
heart entirely on things of no value, you were agree- 
able to your companions. But you cannot excel in 
both styles; you must necessarily lose as mucli of the 
one as you partake of the other. Ifyou do not drink 
with those with whom you used to drink, you cannot 
appear equally agreeable to them. Choose, then, 
whether you would be a drunkard, and agreeable to 
them, — or sober, and disagreeable to them. If you 


318 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


do not sing with those with whom you used to sing, 
you cannot be equally dear to them. Here too, then, 
choose which you will. For if it is better to be modest 
and decent than to have it said of you “ what an agree- 
able fellow,” give up the rest; renounce it; withdraw 
yourself; have nothing to do with it. But if this 
does not please you, incline with your whole force 
the contrary way. Be one of the debauchees; one 
of the adulterers. Act all that is consistent with 
such a character, and you will obtain what you 
would have. Jump up in the theatre, too, and roar 
out in praise of the dancer. But characters so dif- 
ferent are not to be confounded. You cannot act 
both Thersites and Agamemnon. If you would be 
Thersites, you must be hump-backed and bald; if 
Agamemnon, great and noble, and faithful to those 
who are under your care. 


CHAPTER III. 
WHAT THINGS ARE TO BE EXCHANGED FOR OTHERS, 


HEN you have lost anything external, have 

always at hand the consideration of what 
you have got instead of it; and if that be of more 
value, do not by any means call yourself a loser; 
whether it be a horse for an ass; an ox for a sheep; 
a good action for a piece of money ; a due composure 
of mind for a dull jest; or modesty for indecent talk. 
By continually remembering this, you will preserve 
your character such as it ought to be. Otherwise, 
consider that you are spending your time in vain; 
and all that to which you are now applying your mind, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 819 


you are about to spill and overturn. And there 
needs but little, merely a small deviation from rea- 
son, to destroy and overset all. A pilot does not 
need so much apparatus to overturn a ship as to save 
it ; but if he exposes it a little too much to the wind, 
it is lost; even if he should not'do it by design, but 
only for a moment be thinking of something else, it 
is lost. Such is the case here, too. If you do but 
nod a little, all that you have hitherto accomplished 
is gone. Take heed, then, to the appearances of 
things. Keep yourself watchful over them. It is no 
inconsiderable matter that you have to guard; but 
modesty, fidelity, constancy, docility, innocence, fear- 
lessness, serenity ; in short, freedom. For what will 
you sell these? Consider what the purchase is worth. 
“« But shall I not get such a thing instead of it?” 
Consider, if you do not get it, what it is that you have 
instead. -Suppose I have decency, and another the 
office of tribune ; I have modesty, and he the pretor- 
ship? But Ido not applaud where it is unbecoming ; 
I will pay no undeserved honor; for I am free, and 
the friend of God, so as to obey him willingly ; but I 
must not value anything else, neither body, nor pos- 
sessions, nor fame; in short, nothing. For it is not 
His will that I should value them. For if this had 
been His pleasure, He would have placed in them 
my good, which now He hath not done; therefore I 
cannot transgress his commands. Seek in all things 
your own highest good, — and for other aims, recog- 
nize them as far as the case requires, and in accord- 
ance with reason, contented with this alone. Other- 
wise you will be unfortunate, disappointed, restrained, 
hindered.” These are the established laws, these the 
statutes. Of these one ought to be an expositor, and 


320 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


to these obedient, rather than to those of Masurius 
and Cassius.* 


CHAPTER IV. 


CONCERNING THOSE WHO EARNESTLY DESIRE A LIFE 
OF REPOSE. 


EMEMBER that it is not only the desire of 
riches and power that debases us and subjects 

us to others, but even that of quiet, leisure, learning, 
or travelling. For, in general, reverence for any 
external thing whatever makes us subject to others. 
Where is the difference, then, whether you desire to 
be a senator or not to be a senator? Where is the 
difference, whether you desire power or to be out of 
power? Where is the difference, whether you say 
“T am in a wretched way, I have nothing to do; but 
am tied down to books, as inactive as if I were dead”’ ; 
—or, “I am in a wretched way, I have no leisure 
to read?” For as levees and power are among 
things external and uncontrollable by will, so, like- 
wise isa book. For what purpose would you read ? 
Tell me. For if you rest merely in being amused 
and learning something, you are insignificant and 
miserable. But if you refer it to the proper end, 
what is that but a life truly prosperous? And if 
reading does not procure you a prosperous life, of 
what use is it. “But it does procure a prosperous 
life (say you) ; and therefore Iam uneasy at being 
deprived of it.” And what sort of prosperity is that 
which everything can hinder ;—TI do not say Cesar 
alone, or Cesar’s friend, but a crow, a man practis- 


* Two famous lawyers. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 321 


ing the flute, a fever, or ten thousand other things? 
But nothing is so essential to prosperity as that it 
should be permanent and unhindered. Suppose I 
am now called to do something. I now go, therefore, 
and will he attentive to the bounds and measures 
which ought to be observed; that I may act mod- 
estly, steadily, and without desire or aversion as to 
externals. In the next place, I am attentive to other 
men; what they say, and how they are moved ; and 
that not from ill-nature, nor that I may have an op- 
portunity for censure or ridicule; but I turn to my- 
self. “Am I also guilty of the same faults; and 
how then shall I leave them off?” or, “I once thus 
erred, but, God be thanked, not now.” Well; when 
you have done thus, and been employed on such 
things, have you not done as good a work as if you 
had read a thousand lines or written as many? For 
are you uneasy at not reading while you are eating? 
When you eat, or bathe, or exercise, are you not sat- 
isfied with doing it in a manner corresponding to 
what you have read? Why, then, do you not reason 
in like manner about everything? When you ap- 
proach Cesar or any other person, if you preserve 
yourself dispassionate, fearless, sedate; if you are 
rather an observer of what is done than the subject 
of observation; if you do not envy those who are 
preferred to you; if you are not overcome by the 
occasion, what need you more? Books? How, or 
to what end? For these are not the real preparation 
for living, but living is made up of things very differ- 
ent. Just as if a champion, when he enters the lists, 
should begin crying because hé is not still exercising 
without. It was for this that you were exercised. 


For this were the dumb-bells, the dust, and your 
21 


822 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


young antagonists. And do you now seek for these 
when it is the time for actual business? This is just 
as if, in forming our opinions, when perplexed be- 
tween true and false semblances, we should, instead 
of practically distinguishing between them, merely 
peruse dissertations on evidence. 

What, then, is the trouble? That we have neither 
learned by reading, nor by writing, how to deal prac- 
tically with the semblances of things, according to 
the laws of nature. But we stop at learning what is 
said, and, being able to explain it to others, at solv- 
ing syllogisms and arranging hypothetical arguments. 
Hence where the study is, there, too, is the hindrance. 
Do you desire absolutely what is out of your power? 
Be restrained then, be hindered, be disappointed. 
But if we were to read dissertations about the exer- 
tion of our efforts, not merely to see what might be 
said about our efforts, but to exert them well; on 
desire and aversion, that we might not be disap- 
pointed of our desires, nor incur our aversions; on 
the duties of life, that, mindful of our relations, we 
might do nothing irrational nor inconsistent with 
them ; then we should not be provoked at being hin- 
dered in our reading; but should be contented with 
the performance of actions suitable to us, and should 
learn a new standard of computation. Not, “ To-day 
I have perused so many lines; I have written so 
many ”’ ; but, ‘ To-day I have used my efforts as the 
philosophers direct. I have restrained my desires 
absolutely ; I have applied my aversion only to things 
controllable by will. I have not been terrified by 
such a one, nor put out of countenance by such 
another. I have exercised my patience, my absti- 
nence, my beneficence.” And thus we should thank 
God for what we ought to thank him. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 323 


But now we resemble the crowd in another way 
also, and do not know it. One is afraid that he shall 
not be in power; you, that you shall. By no means 
be afraid of it, man; but as you laugh at him, laugh 
at yourself. For there is no difference, whether you 
thirst like one in a fever, or dread water like him 
who is bit by a mad dog. Else how can you say, like 
Socrates, “If it so pleases God, so let it he?” Do 
you think that Socrates, if he had fixed his desires 
on the leisure of the lyceum or the academy, or the 
conversation of the youth there, day after day, would 
have made so many campaigns as he did, so readily ? 
Would not:he have lamented and groaned: “ How 
wretched am I! now must I be miserable here, when 
I might be sunning myself in the lyceum?” Was 
that your business in life, then, to sun yourself? 
Was it not to be truly successful? To be unre- 
strained and free? And how could he have been 
Socrates, if he had lamented thus? How could he 
after that have written Pans in a prison ? 

In short, then, remember this, that so far as you 
prize anything external to your own will, you impair 
that will. And not only power is external to it, but 
the being out of power too; not only business, but 
leisure too. “Then must I live in this tumult now?” 
What do you callatumult? “A multitude of peo- 
ple.” And where is the hardship? Suppose it to be 
the Olympic Games. Think it a public assembly. 
There, too, some bawl out one thing, some an- 
other ; some push the rest. The baths are crowded., 
Yet who of us is not pleased with these assemblies, 
and does not grieve to leave t'+m? Do not be hard 
to please, and squeamish at what happens. ‘“‘ Vinegar 
is disagreeable, for itis sour. Honey is disagreeable, 


824 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


for it disorders my constitution. I do not like vege- 
tables.” ‘So I do not like retirement, it is a desert ; 
I do not like a crowd, itisa tumult.” Why, if things 
are so disposed, that you are to live alone or with 
few, call this condition repose, and make use of it as 
you ought. Talk with yourself, judge of the appear- 
ances presented to your mind; train your mental 
habits to accuracy. But if you happen on a crowd, 
eall it one of the public games, a grand assembly, a 
festival. Endeavor to share in the festival with the 
rest of the world. For what sight is more pleasant 
to a lover of mankind than a great number of men? 
Wesee companies of oxen or horses with pleasure. 
We are highly delighted to see a great many ships. 
Who is sorry to see a great many men? “ But they 
stun me with their noise.” Then your hearing is 
hindered ; and what is that to you? Is your faculty 
of making a right use of the appearances of things 
hindered too? Or who can restrain you from using 
your desire and aversion, your powers of pursuit and 
avoidance, conformably to nature? What tumult is 
sufficient for this ? 

Do but remember the general rules. What is mine? 
What not mine? What is allotted me? What is it 
the will of God that I should do now? What is not 
his will? A little while ago it was His will that you 
should be at leisure, should talk with yourself, write 
about these things, read, hear, prepare yourself. You 
have had sufficient time for this. At present, He says 
to you, “Come now to the combat. Show us what 
you have learned; how you have wrestled.” How 
long would you exercise by yourself? It is now the 
time to show whether you are of the number of those 
champions who merit victory, or of those who go 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 325 


about the world conquered in all the circle of games. 
Why, then, are you out of humor? There is no com- 
bat without a tumult. There must be many prepar- 
atory exercises, many acclamations, many masters, 
many spectators. ‘But I would live in quiet.” 
Why, then, lament and groan as you deserve. For 
what greater punishment is there to those who are 
uninstructed and disobedient to the orders of God,. 
than to grieve, to mourn, to envy; in short, to be dis- 
appointed and unhappy? Are you not willing to 
deliver yourself from all this? “ And how shall I 
deliver myself?” Have you not heard that you 
must absolutely control desire, and apply aversion to 
such things only as are controllable by will? That 
you must consent to resign all, body, possessions, 
fame, books, tumults, power, exemption from power ? 
For to whichsoever your disposition is, you are a 
slave ; you are under subjection; you are made lia- 
ble to restraint, to compulsion ; you are altogether 
the property of others. But have that maxim of 
Cleanthes always ready, s 


“Conduct me, Zeus ; and thou, O destiny.” 


Is it your will that I should go to Rome? Conduct 
me to Rome. To Gyaros?—To Gyaros. To Ath- 
ens ?— To Athens. To prison ?—To prison. If you 
once say, “When may I go to Athens?” you are 
undone. This desire, if it be unaccomplished, must 
necessarily render you disappointed ; and, if fulfilled, 
vain respecting what ought not to elate you ; —if, on, 
the contrary, you are hindered, then you are wretched 
through incurring what you do not like. Therefore 
give up all these things. 

“ Athens is a fine place.” But it isa much finer 


826 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


thing to be happy, serene, tranquil, not to have your 
affairs dependent on others. “ Rome is full of tu- 
mults and visits.” But prosperity is worth all diffi- 
culties. If, then, it be a proper time for these, why 
do not you withdraw your aversion from them? 
What necessity is there for you to be made to carry 
your burden, by being cudgelled like an ass? Other- 
wise, consider that you must always be a slave to him 
who: has the power to procure your discharge, — to 
every one who has the power of hindering you ;— 
and must worship him like your evil genius. 

The only way to real prosperity (let this rule be at 
hand morning, noon, and night) is a resignation of 
things uncontrollable by will; to esteem nothing as 
property; to deliver up all things to our tutelar ge- 
nius and to fortune ; to leave the control of them to 
those whom Zeus hatl made such; to be ourselves 
devoted to that only which is really ours; to that 
which is incapable of restraint; and whatever we 
read, or write, or hear, to refer all to this. 

Therefore I cannot call any one industrious, if I 
hear only that he reads or writes; nor do I call him 
so even if he adds the whole night to the day, unless 
T know to what he applies it. For not even you 
would call him industrious who sits up for the sake 
of a girl; nor, therefore, in the other case dol. But 
if he does it for fame, I call him ambitious; if. for 
money, avaricious; if from the desire of learning, 
bookish ; but not industrious. But if he applies his 
labor to his ruling faculty, in order to treat and reg- 
ulate it conformably to nature, then only I call him 
industrious. Never praise or blame any person on 
account of outward actions that are common to all; 
but only on account of principles. These are the 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 827 : 


peculiar property of each individual, and the things 
which make actions good or bad. 

Mindful of this, enjoy the present and accept all 
things in their season. Ifyou meet in action any of. 
those things which you have made a subject of study, 
rejoice in them. If you have laid aside ill-nature: 
and reviling ; if you have lessened your harshness, 
indecent language, inconsiderateness, effeminacy ; if 
you are not moved by the same things as formerly, 
or if not in the same manner as formerly ;— you 
may keep a perpetual festival, to-day for success in 
one affair, to-morrow for another. How much better 
a reason for sacrifice is this than obtaining.a consul- 
ship or a government? These things you have from 
yourself and from the gods. Remember this, who it 
is that gave them, and to whom and for what purpose. 
Habituated once to these reasonings, can you still 
think that it makes any difference what place God 
allots you? Are not the gods everywhere at the 
same distance? Do not they everywhere see equally 
what is doing ? 


CHAPTER V. 
CONCERNING THE QUARRELSOME AND FEROCIOUS. 


WISE and good person neither quarrels with 

any one himself, nor, as far as possible, suffers . 
another to do so. The life of Socrates affords us an 
example of this too, as well as of other things; since 
he not only everywhere avoided quarrelling himself, 
but did not even suffer others to quarrel. See in 
Xenophon’s Banquet how many quarrels he ended; ° 


328 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


how, again, he bore with Thrasymachus, with Polus, 
with Callicles; how with his wife, how with his son, 
who attempted to confute him, and cavilled at him. 
For he well remembered that no one is master of the 
ruling faculty of another ; and therefore he desired 
nothing but what was his own. ‘“ And what is that?” 
Not that any particular person should be dealt with 
conformably to nature; for that belongs to others ; 
but that while they act in their own way, as they 
please, he should nevertheless live conformably to 
nature, only doing what belongs to himself, in order 
to make them live conformably to nature also. For 
this is the point that a.wise and good person has in 
view. To have the command ofan army? No; but 
if it be allotted him, to properly apply his own powers 
in that sphere. To marry? No; but if marriage 
be allotted him, to act in this sphere also, according 
to the laws of nature. But if he expects perfection 
in his wife or his child, then he asks to have that for 
his own which really belongs to others. And wisdom 
consists in this very point, to learn what things are 
our own and what belong to others. 

What room is there then for quarrelling, to a per- 
son thus disposed? For does he wonder at anything 
that happens? Does it appear strange tohim? Does 
he not prepare for worse and more grievous injuries 
from bad people than actually happen to him? Does 
he not reckon it so much gained if they come short 
of the last extremities? Such a one has reviled you. 
You are much obliged to him that he has not struck 
you. But he has struck you too. You are much 
obliged to him that he has not wounded you too. 
But he has wounded you too. You are much obliged 
to him that he has not killed you. For when did he 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 329 


ever learn, or from whom, that he is a gentle, that he 
is a social animal; that the very injury itself is a 
great mischief to him who inflicts it? As, then, he 
has not learned these things, nor believes them, why 
should he not follow what appears to be for his inter- 
est? Your neighbor has thrown stones. What then? 
Is it any fault of yours? But your goods are broken. 
What then? Are you a piece of furniture? No; 
but your essence consists in the faculty of will. 
What behavior then is assigned you in return? If 
you consider yourself as a wolf, — then, to bite again, 
to throw more stones. But if you ask the question 
as @ man, then examine your treasure; see what fac- 
ulties you have brought into the world with you. 
Are they fitted for ferocity? For revenge? When 
is a horse miserable? When he is deprived of his 
natural faculties. Not when he cannot crow, but 
when he cannot run. And a dog? Not when he 
cannot fly, but when he cannot hunt. Is not a man, 
then, also unhappy in the same manner? Not he 
who cannot strangle lions or perform athletic feats, 
(for he has received no faculties for this purpose from 
nature); but who has lost his rectitude of mind, his 
fidelity. This is he who ought to receive public con- 
dolence for the misfortunes into which he is fallen ; 
not, by Heaven, either he who has the misfortune to 
be born or to die; but he whom it has befallen while 
he lives to lose what is properly his own. Not his 
paternal possessions, his paltry estate or his house, 
his lodging or his slaves, for none of these are a man’s 
own ; but all these belong to others, are servile, de- 
pendent, and very variously assigned by the disposers 
of them. But his personal qualifications as a man, the 
impressions which he brought into the world stamped 


830 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


upon his mind; such as we look for in money, accept- 
ing or rejecting it accordingly. ‘ What impression 
has this piece of money ?” —“ Trajan’s.” — “ Give 
it me.” — “ Nero’s.”* Throw it away. It is false; 
it is good for nothing. So in the other case. “ What 
stamp have his principles ? ”” — “ Gentleness, social af- 
fection, patience, good-nature.” Bring them hither. 
I receive them. I make such a man a citizen; I re- 
ceive him for a neighbor, a fellow-traveller. Only 
see that he have not the Neronian stamp. Is he pas- 
sionate? Is he resentful? Ishe querulous? Would 
he, if he took the fancy, break the heads of those who 
fell in his way? Why then do you call him a man? 
For is everything determined by a mere outward 
form? Then say, just as well, that a piece of wax 
is an apple, or that it has the smell and taste, too. 
But the external figure is not enough; nor, conse- 
quently, is it sufficient to constitute a maf, that he 
has a nose and eyes, if he have not the proper princi- 
ples of aman. Such a one does not understand rea- 
son, or apprehend when he is confuted. He is like 
an ass. Another is dead to the sense of shame. He 
is a worthless creature ; anything rather than a man. 
Another seeks whom he may kick or bite: so that he 
is neither sheep nor ass. But what then? Heisa 
wild beast. 

“Well; but would you have me despised, then?” 
By whom? By those who know you? And how can 
they despise you who know you to be gentle and mod- 
est? But, perhaps, by those who do not know you? 
And what is that to you? For no other artist troubles 
himself about those ignorant of art. “But people 


* Nero being declared an enemy by the Senate, his coin was, in 
consequence of this, prohibited and destroyed. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. del 


will be much readier to attack me.” Why do you 
say me? Can any one hurt your will, or restrain 
you from treating, conformably to nature, the phe- 
nomena of existence? Why, then, are you disturbed 
and desirous to make yourself appear formidable? 
Why do you not make public proclamation that you 
are at peace with all mankind, however they may 
act; and that you chiefly laugh at those who suppose 
they can hurt you? “These wretches neither know 
who I am, nor in what consist my good and evil; 
nor how little they can touch what is really mine.” 
Thus the inhabitants of a fortified city langh at the 
besiegers. ‘What trouble, now, are these people 
giving themselves for nothing? Our wall is secure ; 
we have provisions for a very long time, and every 
other preparation.”” These are what render a city 
fortified and impregnable ; but nothing but its prin- 
ciples render the human soul so. For what wall is 
so strong, what body so impenetrable, what possession 
so unalienable, what dignity so secured against strat- 
agems? All things else, everywhere else, are mortal, 
casily reduced ; and whoever in any degree fixes his 
mind upon them, must necessarily be subject to per- 
turbation, despair, terrors, lameniations, disappointed 
desires, and unavailing aversions. 

And will we not fortify, then, the only citadel that 
is granted us; and, withdrawing ourselves from what 
is mortal and servile, diligently improve what is im- 
mortal and by nature free? Do we not remember 
that no one either hurts or benefits another; but 
only the principles which we hold concerning every- 
thing? It is this that hurts us; this that overturns 
us. Here is the fight, the sedition, the war. It was 
nothing else that made Eteocles and Polynices ene- 


832 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


mies, but their principles concerning empire, and their 
principles concerning exile; that the one seemed the 
extremest evil, the other, the greatest good. Now 
the very nature of every one is to pursue good, to 
avoid evil; to esteem him as an enemy and betrayer 
who deprives us of the one, and involves us in the 
other, though he be a brother, or a son, or father. 
For nothing is more nearly related to us than good. 
So that if good and evil consist in externals, there is 
no affection between father and son, brother and 
brother ; but all is everywhere full of enemies, be- 
trayers, sycophants. But if a right choice be the 
only good, and a wrong one the only evil, what 
further room is there for quarrelling, for reviling ? 
About what can it be? About what is nothing to us. 
Against whom? Against the ignorant, against the 
unhappy, against those who are deceived in the most 
important respects. 

Mindful of this, Socrates lived in his own house, 
patiently bearing a furious wife, a senseless son. For 
what were the effects of her fury? The throwing as 
much water as she pleased on his head, the tramp- 
ling * a cake under her feet. ‘ And what is this to 
me, if I think such things nothing to me? This 
very point is my business ; and neither a tyrant, nor 
a master, shall restrain my will; nor multitudes, 
though I am a single person ; nor one ever so strong, 
though I am ever so weak. For this is given by God 
to every one, free from restraint.” 

These principles make friendship in families, con- 


* Alcibiades sent a fine great cako as a present to Socrates; 
which so provoked the jealousy of the meek Xantippe, that she threw 
it down, and stamped upon it. Socrates only laughed, and said, 
“ Now you will have no share in it yourself.” — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 383 


cord in cities, peace in nations. They make a person 
grateful to God, everywhere courageous, as dealing 
with things merely foreign and of minor importance. 
But we, alas! are able indeed to write and read 
these things, and to praise them when they are read ; 
but very far from being convinced by them. In that 
case, what is said of the Lacedemonians, 


Lions at home, foxes at Ephesns,” 


may be applied to us, too; lions in the school, but 
foxes out of it. 


CHAPTER VI. 


CONCERNING THOSE WHO ARE ANNOYED AT BEING 
PITIED. 


T vexes me, say you, to be pitied. Is this your 
affair, then, or theirs who pity you? And fur- 
ther, how is it in your power to prevent it? “It is, 
if I show them that I do not need pity.” But are 
you now in such a condition as not to need pity, or 
are you not? “Ithink Iam. But these people do 
not pity me for what, if anything, would deserve pity, 
my faults; but for poverty, and want of power, and 
sicknesses, and deaths, and other things of that kind.” 
Are you, then, prepared to convince the world that 
none of these things is in reality an evil; but that it 
is possible for a person to be happy, even when he is 
poor, and without honors and power? Or are you 
prepared to put on the appearance of being rich and 
powerful? The last of these is the part of an arro- 
gant, silly, worthless fellow. Observe, too, by what 
means this fiction must be carried on. You must 


334 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


hire some poor slaves, and get possessed of a few lit- 
tle pieces of plate, and often show them in public; 
and though they are the same, endeavor to conceal 
that they are the same; you must have gay clothes 
and other finery, and make a show of being honored 
by your great people; and endeavor to sup with 
them, or be thought to sup with them; and use some 
vile arts with your person, to make it appear hand- 
somer and genteeler than it really is. All this you 
must contrive, if you would take the second way not 
to be pitied. And the first is impracticable as well as 
tedious, to undertake the very thing that Zeus him- 
self could not do; to convince all mankind what 
things are really good and evil. Is this granted you? 
The only thing granted you is to convince yourself; 
and you have not yet done that; and yet do you 
undertake to convince others? Why, who has lived 
so long with you as you have with yourself? Who 
is so likely to have faith in you, in order to be con- 
vinced by you, as yourself? Who is more truly a. 
well-wisher or a friend to you than yourself? How 
is it, then, that you have not yet convinced yourself? 
Should you not now revolve these things? What 
you were studying was this; to learn to be exempt 
from grief, perturbation, and meanness, and to be 
free. Have you not heard, then, that the only way 
that leads to this is, to give up what is beyond the 
control of will; to withdraw from it, and confess that 
it belongs to others? To what order of things be- 
longs another’s opinion about you? “Things un- 
controllable by will.” Is it nothing then to yon? 
“Nothing.” While you are still piqued and dis- 
turbed about it, then, do you consider that you are 
convinced concerning good and evil ? 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 885 


Letting others alone, then, why will you not be 
your own scholar and teacher? Let others look to 
it, whether it be for their advantage to think and act 
contrary to nature ; but no one is nearer to me than 
myself. What means this? Ihave heard the rea- 
sonings of philosophers, and assented to them; yet, 
in fact, I am not the more relieved. Am I so stupid? 
And yet, in other things to which I had an inelina- 
tion, I was not found very stupid; but I quickly 
learned grammar and the exercises of the palestra, 
and geometry, and the solution of syllogisms. Has 
not reason, then, convinced me? And yet there is 
no one of the other things that I so much approved 
or liked from the very first. And now I read con- 
cerning these subjects, I hear discourses upon them, 
I write about them, and I have not yet found any 
principle more sure than this. What, then, do I 
need? Is not this the difficulty, that the contrary 
principles are not removed out of my mind? Is it 

-not that I have not strengthened these opinions by 
exercise, nor practised them in action? but, like 
arms thrown aside, they are grown rusty, and do not 
suit me? Yet neither in the palestra, nor writing, 
nor reading, nor solving syllogisms, am I contented 
with merely learning; but I apply in every way the 
forms of arguments which are presented to me, and I 
invent others; and the same of convertible proposi- 
tions. But the necessary principles by which I might 
become exempted from fear, grief, and passion, and 
be unrestrained and free, I do not exercise, nor be- 
stow on them the proper care. And, then, I trouble 
myself what others will say of me; whether IJ shall 
appear to them worthy of regard; whether I shall 
appear happy. Will you not see, foolish man, what 


836 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


you can say of yourself? What sort of person you 
appear to yourself in your opinions, in your desires, 
in your aversions, in your pursuits, in your prepara- 
tion, in your intention, in the other proper works of 
amau? But instead of that, do you trouble your- 
self whether others pity you? “Very true. ButI 
am pitied without reason.” Then are you not pained 
by this? And is not he who is in pain to be pitied? 
“Yes.” How, then, are you pitied without reason ? 
For you render yourself worthy of pity by what you 
suffer upon being pitied. 

What says Antisthenes, then? Have you never 
heard? “It is kingly, O Cyrus, to do well and to be 
ill spoken of.” My head is well, and all around me 
think it aches. What is that to me? I am free 
from a fever; and they compassionate me as if I had 
one. “Poor soul, what a long while have you had 
this fever!”’ I say, too, with a dismal countenance, 
Ay, indeed, it is now a long time that I have been 
ill. ‘ What can be the consequence, then?”? What 
pleases God. And at the same time I secretly laugh 
at those who pity me. What forbids, then, but that 
the same may be done in the other case? I am poor, 
but I have right principles concerning poverty. What 
is it to me, then, if people pity me for my poverty? I 
am not in power and others are; but I have such 
opinions as I ought to have concerning power and 
the want of power. Let them see to it who pity me. 
I am neither hungry, nor thirsty, nor cold. But be- 
cause they are hungry and thirsty, they suppose me 
to be so too. What can Ido for them? Am I to go 
about making proclamation, and saying, Do not de- 
ceive yourselves, good people, I am very well; I care 
for neither poverty, nor want of power, nor anything 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 837 


else but right principles? These I possess unre- 
strained, and care for nothing further. 

But what trifling is this? How have I right prin- 
ciples when I am not contented to be what I am; 
but am in agony, how I shall appear? ‘“ But others 
will get more, and be preferred to me.” Well, what 
is more reasonable, than that they who take pains for 
anything should get most in that particular direction, 
in which they take pains? They have taken pains 
for power; you, for right principles: they, for riches; 
you, for a proper use of the phenomena of existence. 
See whether they have the advantage of you in that 
for which you have taken pains, and which they neg- 
lect; if they judge better concerning the natural 
bounds and limits of things; if their desires are less 
often disappointed than yours, their aversions less 
often incurred ; if they aim better in their intentions, 
in their purposes, in their pursuits ; if they preserve 
a becoming behavior as men, as sons, as parents, and 
so on with the other relations of life. But if they 
are in power, and you not, why will you not speak 
the truth to yourself; that you do nothing for the 
sake of power, but that they do everything? It were 
very reasonable that he who carefully seeks anything, 
should be less successful than he who neglects it! 
“No; but since I take care to have right principles, 
it is more reasonable that I should excel.” Yes, in 
respect to what you take pains about, your principles. 
But give up to others the things in which they have’ 
taken more pains than you. Else it is just as if, be- 
cause you have right principles, you should expect to 
aim an arrow better than an archer, or to forge better 
than a smith. Therefore cease to take pains about 
principles, and apply yourself to those things which 

22 


338 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


you wish to possess, and then begin crying, if you do 
not succeed; for you deserve tocry. But now you 
claim that you are engaged and absorbed in other 
things; and they say well that no man can be of two 
trades. One man, as soon as he rises and goes out, 
seeks to whom he may pay his compliments, whom 
he may flatter, to whom he may send a present, how 
he may please the favorite; how, by doing mischief 
to one, he may oblige another. Whenever he prays, 
he prays for things like these; whenever he sacri- 
fices, he sacrifices for things like these. To these he 
transfers the Pythagorean precept: 


«Let not the stealing god of Sleep surprise.” 


*Where have I failed in point of flattery? What 
have I done? Anything like a free, brave-spirited 
man? Ifhe should find anything of this sort, he re- 
bukes and accuses himself. “ What business had you 
to say that? For could you not have lied? Even 
the philosophers say there is no objection against tell- 
ing a lie.” 

But, on the other hand, if you have in reality been 
careful about nothing else but to make a right use 
of the phenomena of existence; then, as soon as you 
are up in the morning, consider what you need in 
order to be free from passion? What, to enjoy tran- 
quillity? “In what doI consist? Merely in body, 
in estate, in reputation? None of these. What, 
then? Jama reasonable creature. What, then, is 
required of me?” Meditate upon your actions. 
Where have I failed in any requisite for prosperity ? 
What have I done, either unfriendly or unsocial? 


* See the Pythagorean verses (quoted in B. III. ¢. 10) of which 
these questions are a parody. — C. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 839 


What have I omitted that was necessary in these 
points ? 

Since there is so much difference, then, in your 
desires, your actions, your wishes, would you yet 
have an equal share with others in those things 
about which you have not taken pains, and they 
have? And do you wonder, after all, and are you 
out of humor if they pity you? But they are not 
out of humor, if you pity them. Why? Because 
they are convinced that they are in possession of their 
proper good; but you are not convinced that you are. 
Hence you are not contented with your own condi- 
tion, but desire theirs; whereas they are contented 
with theirs, and do not desire yours. For if you 
were really convinced that it is you who are in pos- 
session of what is good, and that they are mistaken, 
you would not so much as think what they say about 
you. 


CHAPTER VII. 
OF FEARLESSNESS. 


HAT makes a tyrant formidable? His guards, 

say you, and their swords; they who protect 

his bedchamber ; and they who keep out intruders. 
Why, then, if you bring a child to him amidst these 
guards, is it not afraid? Is it because the child 
does not know what they mean? Suppose, then, 
that any one knows what is meant by guards, and 
that they are armed with swords; and for that very 
reason comes in the tyrant’s way, being desirous, on 
account of some misfortune, to die, and seeking to 
die easily by the hand of another. Does such a man 


840 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


fear the guards? No; for he desires the very thing 
that renders them formidable. Well, then; if any 
one being without an absolute desire to live or die, 
but indifferent to it, comes in the way of a tyrant, 
what prevents his approaching him without fear? 
Nothing. If, then, another should think concerning: 
his estate, or wife, or children, as this man thinks 
concerning his body; and, in short, from some mad- 
ness or folly should be of such a disposition as not to 
care whether he has them or not; but just as chil- 
dren, playing with shells, are busied with the play, 
but not with the shells, so he should pay no regard 
to these affairs, except to carry on the play with 
them, what tyrant, what guards or swords are any 
longer formidable to such a man? 

And is it possible that any one should be thus dis- 
posed towards these things from madness; and the 
Galileans from mere habit; yet that no one should 
be able to learn, from reason and demonstration, that 
God made all things in the world, and made the 
whole world itself unrestrained and perfect; and all 
its parts for the use of the whole? All other crea- 
tures are indeed excluded from a power of compre- 
hending the administration of the world; but a rea- 
sonable being has abilities for the consideration of 
all these things: both that itself is a part, and what 
part; and that it is fit the parts should submit to the 
whole. Besides, being by nature constituted noble, 
magnanimous, and free, it sees that of the things 
which relate to it some are unrestrained and in its 
own power, some restrained and in the power of 
others: the unrestrained, such as depend an will; 
the restrained, such as do not depend on it. And for 
this reason, if it esteems its good and its interest to 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 341 


consist in things unrestrained and in its own power, 
it will be free, prosperous, happy, safe, magnanimous, 
pious, thankful to God for everything, never find- 
ing fault with anything, never censuring anything 
that is brought about by him. But if it esteems its 
good and its interest to consist in externals, and 
things uncontrollable by will, it must necessarily be 
restrained, be hindered, be enslaved to those who 
have the power over those things which it admires 
and fears; it must necessarily be impious, as suppos- 
ing itself injured by God, and unjust, as claiming 
more than its share; it must necessarily, too, be ab- 
ject and base. 

Why may not he who discerns these things live 
with an easy and light heart, quietly awaiting what- 
ever may happen, and bearing contentedly what has 
happened? Shall it be poverty? Bring it; and you 
shall see what poverty is when it is met well. Would 
you have power? Bring toils too along with it. Ban- 
ishment? Wherever I go, it will be well with me 
there ; for it was well with me here, not on account 
of the place, but of the principles which I shall carry 
away with me; for no one can deprive me of these ; 
on the contrary, they alone are my property, and 
cannot be taken away; and their possession suffices 
me wherever I am, or whatever I do. 

“ But it is now time to die.” What is that you call 
dying? Do not talk of the thing in a tragedy strain ; 
but state the thing as it is, that it is time for your 
material part to revert whence it came. And wherd 
is the terror of this? What part of the world is go- 
ing to be lost? What is going to happen that is new 
or prodigious? Is it for this that a tyrant is formida- 
ble? Is it on this account that the swords of his 


842 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


guards seem so large and sharp? Try these things 
upon others. For my part, I have examined the 
whole. No one has authority over me. God hath 
made me free; I know his commands; after this no 
one can enslave me. I have a proper vindicator of 
my freedom; proper judges. Are you the master 
of my body? But what is that tome? Of my little 
estate? But what is that to me? Of banishment 
and chains? Why all these again, and my whole 
body, I give up to you; make a trial of your power 
whenever you please, and you will find how far it 
extends. 

Whom, then, can I any longer fear? Those who 
guard the chamber? Lest they should do — what? 
Shut me out? If they find me desirous to come in, 
let them. ‘“ Why do you come to the door, then?” 
Because it is fitting for me, that while the play lasts 
I should play too. ‘ How then are you incapable of 
being shut out?” Because, ifI am not admitted, I 
would not wish to go in; but would much rather 
that things should he as they are, for I esteem what 
God wills to be better than what I will. To Him I 
yield myself as a servant and a follower. My pur- 
suits, my desires, my very will, must coincide with 
His. Being shut out does not affect me; but those 
who push to get in. Why, then, do not I push too? 
Because I know that there is no really good thing dis- 
tributed to those who get in. But when I hear any 
one congratulated on the favor of Cesar, I ask what 
he has got. “ A province.” Has he the needed wis- 
dom also? ‘A public office.” Has he with it the 
knowledge how to use it? Ifnot, why should I push 
my way in? 

Some one scatters nuts and figs. Children scram- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 843 


ble and quarrel for them; but not men, for they 
think them trifles. But if any one should scatter 
shells, not even children would scramble for these. 
Provinces are being distributed. Let children look to 
it. Money. Let children look to it. Military com- 
mand, a consulship. Let children scramble for them. 
Let these be shut out, be beaten, kiss the hands of the 
giver, or of his slaves. But to me they are mere figs 
and nuts. ‘ What, then, isto be done?”’ If you miss 
them while he is throwing them, do not trouble your- 
self about it; but if a fig should fall into your lap, 
take it, and eat it; for one may pay so much regard 
even toa fig. But if I am to stoop and throw down 
one [rival] or be thrown down by another, and flat- 
ter those who succeed, a fig is not worth this, nor is 
any other of those things which are not really good, 
and which the philosophers have persuaded me not to 
esteem as good. 

Show me the swords of the guards. ‘‘See how 
large and how sharp they are.” What, then, can 
these great and sharp swords do? “They kill.” 
And what can a feverdo? “Nothing else.” And a 
[falling] tile? ‘‘ Nothing else.” Do you then wish 
me to be bewildered by all these things, and to wor- 
ship them, and to go about as a slave to them all? 
Heaven forbid! But having once learned that every- 
thing that is born must likewise die, (that the world 
may not be at a stand, nor the course of it hindered,) I 
no longer see any difference, whether this he effected 
by a fever, or a tile, or a soldier; but if any compari- 
son is to be made, I know that the soldier will effect 
it with less pain and more speedily. Since then I 
neither fear any of those things which he can inflict 
upon me, nor covet anything which he can bestow, 


844 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


why do I stand any longer’in awe of a tyrant? Why 

am I amazed at him? Why do I fear his guards? 

Why do I rejoice, if he speaks kindly to me, and 
receives me graciously ; and why boast to others of 

my reception? For is he Socrates or Diogenes, that 
his praise should show what I am? Or have I set 
my heart on imitating his manners? But to keep up 
the play I go to him and serve him, so long as he 
commands nothing unreasonable or improper. But 

if he should say ‘to me, “Go to Salamis, and bring 
Leon,” * I bid him seek another, for I play no longer. 

“Tead him away.” I follow as a part of the play. 

“But your head will be taken off.” And will his 

own remain on forever; or yours, who obey him? 

“But you will be thrown out unburied.” If I am 
identical with my corpse, I shall be thrown out; but 
if I am something else than the corpse, speak more 

handsomely, as the thing is, and do not think to 
frighten me. These things are frightful to children 
and fools. But if any one, who has once entered into 
the school of a philosopher, knows not what he him- 
self is, then he deserves to be frightened, and to flatter 
the last object of flattery; if he has not yet learnt 
that he is neither flesh, nor bones, nor nerves, but is 
that which makes use of these, and regulates and - 
comprehends the phenomena of existence. 

“Well; but these reasonings make men despise 
the laws.” And what reasonings, then, render those 
who use them more obedient to the laws? But the 
law of fools isno law. And yet, see how these rea- 
sonings render us properly disposed, even towards 
such persons, since they teach us not to assert against 
them any claim wherein they can surpass us. They 


* As with Socrates; see note, ante, p. 314, 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 845 


teach us to give up body, to give up estate, children, 
parents, brothers, to yield everything, to let go every- 
thing, excepting only principles; which even Zeus 
hath excepted and decreed to be every one’s own 
property. What unreasonableness, what breach of 
the laws, is there in this? Where you are superior 
and stronger, there I give way to you. Where, on 
the contrary, I am superior, do you submit to me; 
for this has been my study, and not yours. Your 
study has been to walk upon a mosaic floor, to be 
attended by your servants and clients, to wear fine 
clothes, to have a great number of hunters, fiddlets, 
and players. DoT lay any claim to these? On the 
other hand, have you made a study of principles, or 
even of your own reason? Do you know of what 
parts it consists? How they are combined and 
joined, and with what powers? Why, then, do you 
take it amiss, if another, who has studied them, has 
the advantage of you in these things? “ But they 
are of all things the greatest.” Well; and who re- 
strains you from being conversant with them, and 
attending to them ever so carefully? Or who is bet- 
ter provided with books, with leisure, with assistants ? 
Only turn your thoughts now and then to these mat- 
ters; bestow but a little time upon your own ruling 
faculty. Consider what is the power you have, and 
whence it came, that uses all other things, that exam- 
ines them all, that chooses, that rejects. But while 
you employ yourself merely about externals, you will 
possess those indeed beyond all rivals; but all else 
will be, just as you elect to have it, sordid and neg- 
lected. 


346 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


CHAPTER VIII. 


CONCERNING SUCH AS HASTILY ASSUME THE 
PHILOSOPHIC DRESS. 


EVER commend or censure any one for common 
actions, nor attribute to them either skilfulness 

or unskilfulness; and thus you will at once be free 
both from rashness and ill-nature. Such a one bathes 
hastily. Does he therefore do itill? Not at all. But 
what? Hastily. “Is everything well done, then?” 
By no means. But what is done from good princi- 
ples is well done; what from bad ones, ill. Till you 
know from what principle any one acts, neither com- 
mend nor censure the action. But the principle is 
not easily discerned from the external appearance. 
Such a one is a carpenter. Why? He uses an axe. 
What proof is that? Such a one is a musician, for 
he sings. What proof is that? Such a one is a phi- 
losopher. Why? Because he wears a cloak and 
long hair. What then do mountebanks wear? And 
so, when people see any of these acting indecently, 
they presently say, ‘“‘ See what the philosopher does.” 
But they ought rather, from his acting indecently, 
to say that he is no philosopher. For, if indeed the 
essence of philosophic pursuits is to wear a cloak and 
long hair, they say right; but if it be rather to keep 
himself free from faults, since he does not fulfil his 
profession, why do not they deprive him of his title? 
For this is the way with regard to other arts. When 
we see any one handle an axe awkwardly, we do not 
say, “‘ Where is the use of this art? See how poorly 
carpenters acquit themselves.” But we say the very 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 347 


contrary, “ This man is no carpenter ; for he handles 
an axe awkwardly.” So, if we hear any one sing 
badly, we do not say, “ Observe how musicians sing,” 
but rather, ‘‘ This fellow is no musician.” It is with 
regard to philosophy alone, that people are thus af- 
fected. When they see any one acting inconsistently 
with the profession of a philosopher, they do not take 
away his title; but assuming that he is a philosopher, 
and then reasoning from his improper behavior, they 
infer that philosophy is of no use. 

*¢ What, then, is the reason of this?”” Because we 
pay some regard to the idea which we have of a car- 
penter and a musician, and so of other artists, but 
not of a philosopher; which idea being thus vague 
and confused, we judge of it only from external 
appearances. And of what other art do we form our 
opinion from the dress or the hair? Has it not prin- 
ciples too, and materials, and an aim? What, then, 
are the materials of a philosopher? A cloak? No, 
but reason. Whathis aim? To wearacloak? No, 
but to have his reason in good order. What are his 
principles? Are they how to get a great beard, or 
long hair? No, but rather, as Zeno expresses it, — 
to know the elements of reason, what is each sepa- 
rately and how linked together, and what their con- 
sequences. ; 

Why, then, will you not first see, whether when 
acting improperly he fulfils his profession, ere you 
proceed to blame the study? Whereas now, when 
acting soberly yourself, you say, in regard to what- 
ever he appears to do amiss, “Observe the philoso- 
pher!” As if it were proper to call a person, who 
does such things, a philosopher. And again, “ This 
is philosophical!’ But you do not say, ‘Observe 


848 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


the carpenter, or observe the musician,” when you 
know one of them to be an adulterer, or see him to 
be a glutton. So, in some small degree, even you 
perceive what the profession of a philosopher is; but 
are misled and confounded by your own carelessness. 
And, indeed, even those called philosophers enter up- 
on their profession by commonplace beginnings. As 
soon as they have put on the cloak and let their beards 
grow, they ery, “I ama philosopher.” Yet no one 
says, “I am a musician,” merely because he has 
bought a fiddle and fiddlestick: nor, “Fam a smith,” 
because he is dressed in the cap and apron. But 
they take their name from their art, not from their 
garb. 

For this reason, Euphrates was in the right to say, 
“T long endeavored to conceal my embracing the 
philosophic life; and it was of use to me. For, in the 
first place, I knew that whatever I did right I did 
not for spectators, but for myself. I cat in a seemly 
manner, for my own approbation. I preserved com- 
posure of look and manner, all for God and myself. 
Then, as I contended alone, I alone was in danger. 
Philosophy was in no danger, on my doing anything 
shameful or unbecoming; nor did I hurt the rest of 
the world, which, by offending as a philosopher, I 
might have done. For this reason, they who were 
ignorant of my intention, used to wonder that while 
I conversed and lived entirely with philosophers, I 
never took up the character. And where was the 
harm, that I should be discovered to be a philoso- 
pher by my actions, rather than by the usual badges ? 
See how I eat, how I drink, how I sleep, how I bear, 
how I forbear; how I assist others; how I make use 
of my desires, how of my aversions; how I preserve 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 349 


the natural and acquired relations, without confusion 
and without obstruction. Judge of me hence, if you 
can. But if you are so deaf and blind that you 
would not suppose Vulcan himself to be a good 
smith, unless you saw the cap upon his head, where 
is the harm in not being found out by so foolish a 
judge?” 

It was thus, too, that Socrates concealed himself 
from the multitude; and some even came and de- 
sired him to introduce them to philosophers. Was 
he accustomed to be displeased, then, like us; and 
to say, What! do not you take me for a philosopher ? 
No, he took them and introduced them; contented 
‘with merely being a philosopher, and rejoicing in 
feeling no annoyance, that he was not thought one. 
For he remembered his business; and what is the 
business of a wise and good man? To have many 
scholars? By no means. Let those see to it who 
have made this their study. Well, then, is it to bea 
perfect master of difficult theorems? Let others see 
to that, too. What, then, was his position, and what 
‘did he desire to be? What constituted his hurt or 
advantage? “If,” said he, “any one can still hurt 
me, I am accomplishing nothing. If I depend for my 
advantage upon another, lam nothing. Have I any 
wish unaccomplished? Then I am unhappy.” To 
such a combat he invited every one, and, in my opin- 
ion, yielded to no one. But do you think it was 
by making proclamation, and saying, “I am such a 
one?” Far from it: but by being such aone. For 
it is folly and insolence to say, “I am passive and 
undisturbed. Be it, known to you, mortals, that 
while you. are disturbed and vexed about things of 
no value, I alone am free from all perturbation.” 


850 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Are you then so little satisfied with your exemption 
from pain that you must needs make proclamation: 
“ Come hither all you who have the gout, or the head- 
ache, or a fever, or are lame, or blind; and see me, 
free from every distemper.” This is vain and shock- 
ing, unless you can show, like Aisculapius, by what 
method of cure they may presently become as free 
from distempers as yourself, and can bring your own 
health as a proof of it. 

Such is the Cynic honored with the sceptre and 
diadem from Zeus; who says, “That you may see, 
O mankind, that you do not seek happiness and tran- 
quillity where it is, but where it is not, behold, I am 
sent an example to you from God ;— who have nei- 
ther estate, nor house, nor wife, nor children, — nor 
even a bed, coat, or furniture. And yet see how in 
what good condition lam. Try me; and if you see 
me free from perturbation, hear the remedies, and by 
what means I was cured.” This now is benevolent 
and noble. But consider whose business it is. That 
of Zeus, or his whom he judges worthy of this office ; 
that he may never show to the world anything to 
impeach his own testimony for virtue and against 
externals. . 


«Neither pallid of hue, nor wiping tears from his cheek.” * 


And not only this, but he does not desire or seek for 
company, or place, or amusement, as boys do the vin- 
tage time, or holidays ;— being always fortified by 
virtuous shame, as others are by walls, and gates, and 
sentinels. 

But now they who have only such an inclination 
to philosophy as weak stomachs have to some kinds 


* Homer, Odyssey, XI. 528, 529.—H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 851 


of food, of which they will presently grow sick, ex- 
pect to hasten to the sceptre, to the kingdom. They 
let their hair grow, assume the cloak, bare the shoul- 
der, wrangle with all they meet; and if they see any 
one in a thick, warm coat, must needs wrangle with 
him. First harden yourself against all weather, man. 
Consider your inclination ; whether it be not that of 
a weak stomach, or of a longing woman. First study 
to conceal what you are; philosophize a little while 
by yourself. Fruit is produced thus. The seed must 
first be buried in the ground, lie hid there some time, 
and grow up by degrees, that it may come to perfec- 
tion. But if it produces the ear before the stalk has 
its proper joints, it is imperfect, and of the garden of 
Adonis.* Now you are a poor plant of this kind. 
You have blossomed too soon: the winter will kill 
you. See what countrymen say about seeds of any 
sort, when the warm weather comes too early. They 
are in great anxiety for fear the seeds should shoot 
out too luxuriantly ; and then one frost taking them 
may show how prejudicial their forwardness was. 
Beware you tco, OQ man. You have shot out luxuri- 
antly ; you have sprung forth towards a trifling fame, 
before the proper season. You seem to be somebody, 
as a fool may among fools. You will be taken by the 
frost; or rather, you are already frozen downward 
at the root; you still blossom indeed a little at the 
top, and therefore you think you are still alive and 
flourishing. 

* At the feast of Adonis there were carried about little earthen 
pots filled with monld, in which grew several sorts of herbs. These 
were called gardens ; and from thence the gardens of Adonis came to 
be proverbially applied to things unfruitful or fading ; because those 
herbs were only sowed so long before the festival as to sprout forth 
and he green at that time, and then were presently cast into the 
water. —C. 


352 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Let us, at least, ripen naturally. Why do you lay 
us open? Why do you force us? We cannot yet 
bear the air. Suffer the root to grow; then the first, 
then the second, then the third joint of the stalk to 
spring from it; and thus nature will force out the 
fruit, whether I will or not. For who that is charged 
with such principles, but must perceive, too, his own 
powers, and strive to put them in practice. Not even 
a bull is ignorant of his own powers, when any wild 
beast approaches the herd, nor waits he for any one 
to encourage him ; nor does a dog when he spies any 
game. And if I have the powers of a good man, shall 
I wait for you to qualify me for my own proper ac- 
tions? But believe me, | have them not quite yet. 
Why, then, would you wish me to be withered before 
my time, as you are ? 


CHAPTER IX. 
CONCERNING A PERSON WHO HAD GROWN IMMODEST. 


HEN you see another in power, set this against 

it, that you have the advantage of not needing 

power. When you see another rich, see what you 
have instead of riches; for if you have nothing in 
their stead, you are miserable. But if you have the 
advantage of not needing riches, know that you have 
something more than he has, and of far greater value. 
Another possesses a handsome woman ; you the hap- 
piness of not desiring a handsome woman. Do you 
think these are little matters? And what would not 
those very persons give, who are rich and powerful, 
and possess handsome women, if they were only able 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 353 


to despise riches and power, and those very women 
whom they love and whom they possess! Do not 
you know of what nature the thirst of one in a fever 
is? It has no resemblance to that of a person in 
health. The latter drinks and is satisfied. But the 
other, after being delighted a very little while, is nau- 
seated, the water becomes bile, he is sick at his stom- 
ach, and becomes more thirsty than ever. It is the 
same with avarice, ambition, lust. Presently comes 
jealousy, fear of-loss, unbecoming words, designs, 
and actions. 

* And what,”’ say you, “do I lose?” You were 
modest, man, and are so no longer. Have you lost 
nothing? Instead of Chrysippus and Zeno, you read 
Aristides* and Euenus.t| Have you lost nothing, 
then? Instead of Socrates and Diogenes, you admire 
him who can corrupt and seduce most women. You 
would be handsome, by decking your person, when 
you are not really so. You love to appear in fine 
clothes, to attract female eyes; and, if you anywhere 
meet with a good perfumer, you esteem yourself a 
happy man. But formerly you did not so much as 
think of any of these things; but only where you 
might find a decent discourse, a worthy person, a 
noble design. For this reason, you used to appear 
like a man both at home and abroad; to wear a 
manly dress; to held discourses worthy of a man. 
And after this, do you tell me you have lost noth- 
ing? What then, do men lose nothing but money? 
Is not modesty to be lost? Is not decency to be lost ? 
Or can he who loses these suffer no injury? You 
indeed perhaps no longer think anything of this sort 

* An indecent poet of Miletus. — C. 


¢ A writer of amorous verses. — C. 
23 


854 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


to be an injury. But there was once a time when you 
accounted this to be the only injury and hurt; when 
you were anxiously afraid lest any one should shake 
your regard from such discourses and actions. See, 
it is not shaken by another, but by yourself. Fight 
against yourself, recover yourself to decency, to mod- 
esty, to freedom. If you had formerly been told any: 
of these things of me, that one prevailed on me to 
commit adultery, to wear such a dress as yours, or to 
be perfumed, would you not have gone and laid vio- 
lent hands on the man who thus abused me? And 
will you not now help yourself? For how much 
easier is that sort.of assistance? You need not kill, 
or fetter, or affront, or go to law with any one; 
but merely talk with yourself, the person who will 
most readily be persuaded by you, and with whom 
no one has greater weight than you. And, in the 
first place, condemn your actions; but when you 
have condemned them, do not despair of yourself, 
nor be like those poor-spirited people who, when they 
have once given way, abandon themselves entirely, 
and are carried along as by a torrent. Take exam- 
ple from the wrestling-masters. Has the boy fallen 
down? Get up again, they say; wrestle again, till 
you have acquired strength. Be you affected in the 
same manner. For be assured that there is nothing 
more tractable than the human mind. You need 
but will, and it is done, it is set right; as, on the 
contrary, you need but nod, over the work, and it is 
ruined. For both ruin and recovery are from within. 

“ And, after all, what good will this do me?” 
What greater good do you seek? From being im- 
pudent, you will become modest; from indecent, 
decent; from dissolute, sober. But if you seek any 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 855 


greater things than these, do as you are doing. It is 
no longer in the power of any God to save you. 


CHAPTER X. 


WHAT THINGS WE ARE TO DESPISE, AND WHAT 
CHIEFLY TO VALUE. 


HE doubts and perplexities of all men are con- 
cerning externals ; — what. they shall do, — how 

it will be,— what will be the event,— whether this 
thing will happen, or that? All this is the talk of 
persons engaged in things uncontrollable by will. 
For who says, How shall I do, not to assent to what 
is false? How, not to dissent from what is true? 
If any one is of such a good disposition as to be anx- 
ious about these things, I will remind him: “ Why 
are you anxious? It is in your own power. Be 
assured. Do not hastily give your assent before 
you have applied those tests prescribed by nature.” 
Again, if he be anxious, for fear lest he should fail of 
what he seeks or incur what he shuns,1 will first 
embrace him, because, slighting what others are flut- 
tered and terrified about, he takes care of what is his 
own, where his very being is; then I will say to him: 
“If you would not fail of what you seek, or incur 
what you shun, desire nothing that belongs to oth- 
ers; shun nothing beyond your own power; other- 
wise you must necessarily be disappointed in what 
you seek, and incur what you shun.” Where is the 
doubt here? Where the room for, How will it be? 
What will be the event? And Will this happen, or that? 
Is not the event uncontrollable by will? “Yes.” And 


856 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


does not the: essence of good and evil consist in what 
is within the control of will? It is in your power, 
then, to treat eyery event conformably to nature? 
Can any one restrain you? “No one.” Then do 
not say to me any more, How will it be? For, how- 
ever it be, you will set it right, and the event to you 
will be auspicious. 

Pray what would Hercules have been, if he had 
said, “‘ What can be done to prevent a great lion, or 
a large boar, or savage men, from coming in my 
way?” Why, what is that to you? Ifa large boar 
should come in your way, you will fight the greater 
combat; if wicked men, you will deliver the world 
from wicked men. “ But then if I should die by 
this means?” You will die asa good man, in the 
performance of a gallant action. For since, at all 
events, one must die, one must necessarily be found 
doing something, either tilling, or digging, or trading, 
or serving a cousulship, or sick with indigestion or 
dysentery. At what employment, then, would you 
have death find you? For my part, I would have it 
to be some humaue, beneficent, public-spirited, noble 
action. But if I cannot be found doing any such 
great things, yet, at least, I would be doing what I 
am incapable of being restrained from, what is given 
me to do, — correcting myself, improving that faculty 
which makes use of the phenomena of existence to 
procure tranquillity, and render to the several rela- 
tions of life their due; and if I am so fortunate, ad- 
vancing still further to-the security, of judging right. 
If death overtakes me in such a situation, it is enough 
for me if I can stretch out my hands to God, and say, 
“The opportunities which J have received from Thee 
of compreLending and obeying thy administration, I 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 357 


have not neglected. As far ag in me lay, I have not: 
dishonored Thee. See how I have used my percep- 
tions; how my convictions. Have I at any time 
found fault with Thee? Have I been discontented 
at Thy dispensations; or wished them otherwise ? 
Have I transgressed the relations of life? I thank 
Thee that Thou hast brought me into being. Iam 
satisfied with the time that I have enjoyed the things 
which thou hast given me. Receive them back again, 
and distribute them as thou wilt; for they were all 
Thine, and Thou gavest them to me.”’ 

Is it not enough to depart in this mood of mind? 
And what life is better and more becoming than that 
of such a one? Or what conclusion happier? But 
in order to attain these advantages, there are no in- 
considerable risks to be encountered. You cannot 
seek a consulship and these things too, nor toil for 
an estate and these things too, nor take charge of 
your slaves and yourself too. But if you insist on 
anything of what belongs to others, then what is your 
own is lost. This is the nature of the affair. Noth- 
ing is to be had for nothing. And where is the won- 
der? If you would be consul, you must watch, run 
about, kiss hands, be wearied down with waiting at 
the doors of others, must say and do many slavish 
things, send gifts to many, daily presents to some. 
And for what result? Twelve bundles of rods;* to 
sit three or four times on the tribunal; to give the 
games of the circus, and suppers in baskets to all the 
world; or let any one show me what there is in it 
more than this. Will you, then, employ no expense 
and no pains to acquire peace and tranquillity, to 
sleep sound while you do sleep, to be thoroughly 


* The ensigns of the consular office. — C. 


858 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


awake while you are awake, to fear nothing, to be anx- 
ious for nothing? But if anything belonging to you 
be lost or idly wasted, while you are thus engaged, or 
another gets what: you ought to have had, will you 
immediately begin fretting at what has happened? 
Will you not compare the exchange you have made? 
How much for how much? But you would have 
such great things for nothing, ] suppose. And how 
can you? Two trades cannot be combined; you 
cannot bestow your care both upon externals and 
your own ruling faculty. But if you would have the 
former, let the latter alone ; or you will succeed in 
neither, while you are drawn in different ways by the 
two. On the other hand, if you would have the lat- 
ter, let the former alone. ‘The oil will be spilled, 
the furniture will be spoiled ” ; but still I shall-be 
free from passion. ‘There will be a fire when I am 
out of the way, and the books will be destroyed ”’; 
— but still I shall make a right use of the phenome- 
na of existence. “ But I shall have nothing to eat.” 
IfI am so unlucky, dying isa safe harbor. That is 
the harbor for all, death ; that is the refuge ; and for 
that reason there is nothing difficult in life. You 
may go out of doors when you please, and be troubled 
with smoke no longer. 

Why, then, are you anxious? Why break your 
rest? Why do you not calculate where your good 
and evil lie; and say, “They are both in my own 
power; nor can any deprive me of the one, nor 
involve me against my will in the other.” Why, 
then, do not I lay myself down and sleep? What is 
my own is safe. Let what belongs to others look to 
itself, who carries it off, how it is distributed by him 
who hath the disposal of it. Who am I, to will that it 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 859 


should be so and so? For is the option given to 
me? Has any one made me the dispenser of it? 
What I have in my own disposal is enough for me. 
IT must make the best I can of this. Other things 
must be as their master. pleases. 

Does any one who has these things before his eyes 
lie sleepless, and shift from side to side? What 
would he have, or what needs he? Patroclus,* or 
Antilochus, or Menelaus? Why, did he ever think 
any one of his friends immortal? When was it not 
obvious that on the morrow, or the next day; he him- 
self or that friend might die? ‘Ay, very true,” 
he says; “but I reckoned that he would survive me, 
and bring up my son.” Because you were a fool, 
and reckoned upon uncertainties. Why, then, do 
you not blame yourself, instead of sitting in tears, 
like a girl? ‘ But he used to set my dinner before 
me.” Because he was alive, foolish man; but now 
he cannot. But Automedon will set it before you; 
and if he should die, you will find somebody else. 
What if the vessel in which your meat used to be 
cooked should happen to be broken; must you die 
with hunger because you have not your old vessel ? 
Do you not send and buy a new one? 


«What greater evil could afflict my breast ?” 


Is this your evil, then? And, instead of removing it, 
do you accuse your mother, that she did not foretell 
it to you, that you might have spent your whole life 
in grieving from that time forward ? 

Do you not think now that Homer composed all 
this on purpose to show us that the noblest, the 


* This whole paragraph refers to the lament of Achilles over 
Patroclus. Iliad, XIX. $15, ete. ——H. 


860 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


strongest, the richest, the handsomest of men may 
nevertheless be the most unfortunate and wretched, 
if they have not the principles they need ? 


CHAPTER XI. 
OF PURITY. 


NOME doubt whether the love of society be com- 
prehended in the nature of man; and yet these 
very persons do not seem to me to doubt but that 
purity is by all means comprehended in it; and that 
by this, if by anything, it is distinguished from brute 
animals. When, therefore, we see any animal clean- 
ing itself, we are apt to cry with wonder, that it is like 
a human creature. On the contrary, if an animal is 
censured, we are presently apt to say, by way of ex- 
cuse, that it is not a human creature. Such excel- 
lence do we suppose to be in man, which we first 
received from the Gods. For as they are by nature 
pure and uncorrupt, in proportion as men approach 
to them by reason, they are tenacious of purity and 
incorruption. But since it is impracticable that their 
essence, composed of such materials, should be abso- 
lutely pure, it is the office of reason to endeavor to 
render it as pure as possible. 

The first and highest purity or impurity, then, is 
that which is formed in the soul. But you will not 
find the impurity of the soul and body to be alike. 
For what stain can you find in the soul, unless it he 
something which renders it impure in its operations ? 
Now the operations of the soul are its pursuits and 
avoidances, its desires, aversions, preparations, inten- 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 361 


tions, assents. What, then, is that which renders it 
defiled and impure in these operations? Nothing 
else than its perverse judgments. So that the im- 
purity of the soul consists in wicked principles, and 
its purification in forming right principles; and that 
is pure which has right principles, for that alone is 
unmixed and undefiled in its operations. 

Now we should, as far as possible, endeavor after 
something like this in the body, too. It is impossi- 
ble but that in such a composition as man, there 
must be a discharge of superfluous phlegm. For 
this reason, Nature has made hands, and the nostrils 
themselves as channels to let out the moisture ; nor 
can this be neglected with propriety. It was impos- 
sible but that the feet should be bemired and soiled 
from what they pass through. Therefore Nature has 
prepared water and hands. It was impossible but 
that some uncleanness must cleave to the teeth from 
eating. Therefore, she says, rinse your teeth. Why? 
That you may be a man, and not a wild beast, or a 
swine. It was impossible but that, from perspiration 
and the pressure of the clothes, something dirty and 
necessary to be cleaned should remain upon the body. 
For this there is water, oil, hands, towels, brushes, 
soap, and other necessary apparatus for its purifica- 
tion. But no; a smith indeed will get the rust off his 
iron, and have proper instruments for that purpose ; 
and you yourself will have your plates washed before 
you eat, unless you are quite dirty and slovenly ; but 
you will not wash nor purify your body. “ Why 
should I?” say you. I tell you again, in the first 
place, that you may be like a man; and, in the next, 
that you may not offend those with whom you con- 
verse. Do you think it fitting to smell offensively ? 


862 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Be itso. But is it fitting as regards those who sit 
near you? Who are placed at the table with you? 
Who salute you? Either go into a desert, as you 
deserve, or live solitary at home, and be the only suf- 
ferer. But to what sort of character does it belong 
to live in a city, and behave so carelessly and incon- 
siderately? If Nature had trusted even a horse to 
your care, would you have overlooked and neglected 
him? Yet now, without being sensible of it, you do 
something like this. Consider your body as commit- 
ted to you, instead of a horse. Wash it, rub it, take 
care that it may not be any one’s aversion, nor dis- 
gust any one. Who is not more disgusted at a foul, 
unwholesome-looking sloven, than at a person who 
has been accidentally rolled in filth? The stench of 
the one is adventitious, from without; but that which 
arises from want of care is a kind of inward putrefac- 
tion. “ But Socrates bathed but seldom.” Yet his 
person looked clean, and was so agreeable and pleas- 
ing, that the most beautiful and noble youths were 
fond of him, and desired rather to sit by him than by 
those who had the finest persons. He might have 
omitted both bathing and washing, if he had pleased ; 
and yet his amount of bathing had its effect. Cold 
water may supply the place of the warm bath. “ But 
Aristophanes calls him one of the pallid, barefooted 
philosophers.” * Why, so he says, too, that he walked 
in the air, and stole clothes from the Palestra. Be- 
sides, all who have written of Socrates, affirm quite 
the contrary ; that he was not only agreeable in his 
conversation, but in his person too. And, again, 
they write the same of Diogenes. For we ought not 
to frighten the world from philosophy by the appear- 


* Clouds, I. 103. — H. 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS, 868 


ance of our persons; but to show our serenity of 
mind, as in all other ways, so in the care of our per- 
sons. ‘See, all of you, that I have nothing; that I 
want nothing. Without house, without city, and an 
exile (if that happens to be the case), and without a 
home, I live more easily and prosperously than the 
noble and rich. Look upon my person, too, that it 
is not injured by coarse fare.” But if any one should 
tell me this, bearing the habit and the visage of a 
condemned criminal, what God should persuade me 
to come near philosophy, while it renders men such 
figures? Heaven forbid! I would not do it, even 
if I was sure to become a wise man for my pains. 
I declare, for my own part, I would rather that a 
young man, on his first inclination to philosophy, 
should come ‘to me finically dressed, than with his 
hair spoiled and dirty. For there appears in him 
some idea of beauty and desire of decency; and 
where he imagines it to be, there he applies his en- 
deavors. One has nothing more to do but to point it 
out to him, and say, “ You seek beauty, young man, 
and you do well. Be assured, then, that it springs 
from the rational part of you. Seek it there, where 
the pursuits and avoidances, the desires and aver- 
sions, are concerned. Herein consists your excel- 
lence; but the paltry body is by nature clay. Why 
do you trouble yourself, to no purpose, about it? 
You will be convinced by time, if not otherwise, that 
it is nothing.” But if he should come to me soiled 
and dirty, with moustaches’ drooping to his knees, 
what canI say to him? By what similitude allure 
him? For what has he studied which has any re- 
semblance to beauty, that I may transfer his atten- 
tion, and say that beauty is not there, but here? 


864 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


Would you have me tell him that beauty consists not 
in filth, but in reason? For has he any desire of 
beauty? Has he any appearance of it? Go, and 
argue with a hog not to roll in the mire. 

It was in the quality of a young man who loved 
beauty, that Polemo was touched by the discourses 
of Xenocrates. For he entered with some incentives 
to the study of beauty, though he sought in the 
wrong place. And, indeed, Nature hath not made 
the very brutes dirty which live with man. Does a 
horse wallow in the mire? Or a good dog? But 
swine, and dirty geese, and worms, and spiders, 
which are banished to the greatest distance from 
human society. Will you, then, who are a man, 
choose not to be even one of the animals that are 
conversant with man; but rather a worm or a spi- 
der? Will you not bathe sometimes, be it in what- 
ever manner you please? Will you never use water 
to wash yourself? Will you not come clean, that 
they who converse with you may have some pleasure 
in you? But will you accompany us, in your un- 
cleanness, even to the temples, where all unclean 
ways are forbidden ? 

What, then, would anybody have you sates your- 
self to the utmost? By no means, except in those 
things where our nature requires it, in reason, prin- 
ciples, actions; but in our persons, only so far as 
neatness requires, so far as not to give offence. But 
if you hear that it is not right to wear purple, you 
must go, I suppose, and roll your cloak in the mud, 
or tear it. “But how can I have a fine cloak?” 
You have water, man; wash it. What an amiable 
youth is here! How worthy this old man, to love 
and be loved! A fit person to be trusted with the 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 365 


instruction of our sons and daughters, and attended 
by young people as occasion may require, —to read 
them lectures from a dunghill! Every deterioration 
takes its origin from something human; but this al- 
most dehumanizes a man. 


CHAPTER XII. 
OF TAKING PAINS. 


HEN you cease to take pains for a little while, 

do not fancy you may recommence whenever 

you please, but remember this, that by means of the 
fault of to-day, your affairs must necessarily be in a 
worse condition for the fature. The first and worst 
evil is that there arises a habit of neglect; and then 
a habit of postponing effort, and constantly procrasti- 
nating as to one’s successes and good behavior and 
orderly thought and action. Now if procrastination 
as to anything is advantageous, it must be still more 
advantageous to omit it altogether; but if it be not 
advantageous, why do you not take pains all the 
time? “I would play to-day.” What then? Ought 
you not to take proper pains about it? “I would 
sing.” But why not take proper pains about it? 
For there is no part of life exempted, about which 
pains are not needed. For will you do anything the 
worse by taking pains, and the better by neglect? 
What else in life is best performed by heedless peo- 
ple? Does a smith forge the better by heedlessness ? 
Does a pilot steer more safely by heedlessness? Or 
is any other, even of the minutest operations, best 
performed heedlessly? Do you not perceive that, 


3866 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


when you have let your mind loose, it is no longer in 
your power to call it back, either to propriety, or 
modesty, or moderation? But you do everything 
at haphazard; you merely follow your inclinations, 

“To what, then, am I to direct my pains.” 

Why, in the first place, to those universal max- 
ims which you must always have at hand; and not 
sleep, or arise, or drink, or eat, or converse without 
them : — that no one is the master of another’s will; 
and that it is in the will alone that good and evil lie. 
No one, therefore, is my master, either to procure me 
any good, or to involve me in any evil; but I alone 
have the disposal of myself with regard to these 
things. Since these, then, are secured to me, what 
need have I to be troubled about externals? What 
tyrant is formidable? What disease? What pov- 
erty? What offence? “Ihave not pleased such a 
one.” Js he my concern then? Is he my con- 
science? “No.” Why,, then, do I trouble myself 
any further about him? “But he is thought to be of 
some consequence.” Let him look to that; and they 
who think him so. But I have One whom I must 
please, to whom I must submit, whom I must obey ; 
God, and those who surround Him. He has in- 
trusted me with myself, and made my will subject 
to myself alone, having given me rules for the right 
use of it. If I follow the proper rules in syllogisms, 
in convertible propositions, I do not heed or regard 
any one who says anything contrary to them. Why, 
then, am I vexed at being censured in matters of 
greater consequence? What is the reason of this 
perturbation? Nothing else, but that in this instance 
I want practice. For every science despises igno- 
rance and the ignorant; and not only the sciences, 


‘ 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 36T 


but even the arts. Take any shoemaker, take any 
smith you will, and he may laugh at the rest of the 
world, so far as his own business is concerned. 

In the first place, then, these are the maxims we 
must have ready, and do nothing without them, but 
direct the soul to this mark. To pursue nothing ex- 
ternal, nothing that belongs to others, but as He who 
hath the power hath appointed. Things controllable 
by will are to be pursued always; and the rest as 
may be permitted. Besides this, we must remember 
who we are, and what name we bear, endeavoring 
to use all the circumstances of life in their proper re- 
lations ; what is the proper time for singing, what 
for play, and in what company; what will be the 
consequence of our performance; whether our com- 
panions will despise us, or we ourselves; when to 
employ raillery, and whom to ridicule; upon what 
occasions to comply, and with whom; and then, in 
complying, how to preserve our own character. 

Wherever you deviate from any of these rules, the 
damage is immediate ; not from anything external, 
but from the very action itself. “‘ What, then, is it 
possible by these means to be faultless?” Impracti- 
cable; but this is possible, to use a constant endeavor 
to be faultless. For we shall have cause to be satis- 
fied, if, by never remitting our pains, we shall be 
exempt at least from a few faults. But now, when 
you say you will begin to take pains to-morrow, be 
assured that it is the same thing as if you said, “ To- 
day I will be shameless, impertinent, base, it shall be: 
in the power of others to grieve me; I will be pas- 
sionate, I will be envious to-day.”” See to how many 
evils you give yourself up. “ But all will be well to- 
morrow.” How much better to-day? If it be for 


868 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


your interest to-morrow, how much more to-day, that 
it may be in your power to-morrow too, and that you 
may not again defer it until the third day. 


CHAPTER XIII. 
CONCERNING SUCH AS ARE TOO COMMUNICATIVE. 


HEN any one appears to us to discourse frank- 

ly of his own affairs, we too are somehow 
tempted to disclose our secrets to him; and we con- 
sider this to be acting with frankness. First, because 
it seems unfair that when we have heard the affairs 
of our neighbor, we should not in return communi- 
cate ours to him; and besides we think that we shall 
not appear of a frank character, in concealing what 
belongs to ourselves. Indeed it is often said, “TI 
have told you all my affairs; and will you tell me 
none of yours? How happens this?” Lastly, it is 
supposed that we may safely trust him who has al- 
ready trusted us; for we imagine that he will never 
discover our affairs, for fear we should in turn dis- 
cover his. It is thus that the inconsiderate are 
caught by the soldiers at Rome. A soldier sits by 
you in a civilian’s dress, and begins to speak ill of 
Cesar. Then you, as if you had received a pledge 
of his fidelity, by his first beginning the abuse, say 
likewise what you think ; and so you are led away in 
chains to execution. 

Something like this is the case with us in general. 
But when one has safely intrusted his secrets to me, 
shall I, in imitation of him, trust mine to any one who 
comes in my way? The case is different. I indeed 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 369 


hold my tongue (supposing me to be of such a dis- 
position) ; but he goes and discovers them to every- 
body; and then, when I come to find it out, if I 
happen to be like him, from a desire of revenge, I 
discover his; and asperse and am aspersed. But if 
IT remember that one man does not hurt another; but 
that every one is hurt or profited by his own actions, 
I may indeed keep to this, not to do anything like 
him ; yet, by my own talkative folly, I suffer what I 
do suffer. 

“Ay; but it is unfair, when you have heard the 
secrets of your neighbor, not to communicate any- 
thing to him in return.”” Why, did I ask you to do 
it, sir? Did you tell me your affairs upon condition 
that I should tell you mine in return? If you are a 
gossip, and take all you meet for friends, would you 
have me too hecome like you? But what if the case 
be this ; that you did right in trusting your affairs to 
me, but it is not right that I should trust you? 
Would you have me run headlong, and fall? This 
is just as if 1 had a sound barrel, and you a leaky 
one; and you should come and deposit your wine 
with me, to be put into my barrel; and then should 
take it ill, that, in my turn, I did not trust you 
with my wine. No. You have a leaky barrel. How, 
then, are we any longer upon equal terms? You 
have intrusted your affairs to an honest man, and a 
man of honor; one who finds his help or harm in his 
own actions alone, and in nothing external. Would 
you have me intrust mine to you, who have dis- 
honored your own will, and who would get a paltry 
sum, or a post of power or preferment at court, 
even if it required you to kill your own children, like 
Medea? Where is the fairness in this? But show 

24 


870 THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 


me that you are faithful, honorable, steady; show 
me that you have principles conducive to friendship ; 
show me that your vessel is not leaky, and you shall 
see that I will not wait for you to intrust your affairs 
to me, but I will come and entreat you to hear mine. 
For who would not make use of a good vessel? Who 
despises a benevolent and friendly adviser? Who will 
not gladly receive one to share the burden, as it were, 
of his difficulties; and by sharing, to make it lighter? 
“ Well; but I trust you, and you do not trust me.” 
In the first place, you do not really trust me; but 
you are a gossip, and therefore can keep nothing in. 
For if the former be the case, trust only me. But 
now, whenever you see a man at leisure, you sit 
down by him, and say: “My dear friend, there is 
not a man in the world who wishes me better, or has 
more kindness for me, than you; I entreat you to 
hear my affairs.” And this you do to those with 
whom you have not the least acquaintance. But if 
you do trust me, it is plainly as a man of fidelity and 
honor, and not because I have told you my affairs. 
Let me alone, then, till I reciprocate this opinion. 
Convince me that, if a person has told his affairs to 
any one, it is a proof of his being a man of fidelity 
and honor. For if this were the case, I would go 
about and tell my affairs to the whole world, if I 
could thus become a man of fidelity and honor. But 
that is no such matter; for it demands of a man to 
have no ordinary principles. 

If, then, you see any one taking pains for things 
that belong to others, and subjecting his will to them, 
be assured that this man has a thousand things to 
compel and restrain him. He has no need of burn- 
ing pitch, or the torturing wheel, to make him tell 


THE DISCOURSES OF EPICTETUS. 371 


what he knows; but the nod of a girl, for instance, 
will shake his purpose; the good-will of a courtier, 
the desire of an office, of an inheritance; ten thou- 
sand other things of that sort. It must therefore he 
remembered in general, that confidential discourses 
require fidelity and a certain sort of principles. And 
where, at this time, are these easily to be found? 
Pray let any one show me a person of such a disposi- 
tion as to say, I concern myself only for those things 
which are my own, incapable of restraint, and by 
nature free. This I esteem the essence of good. 
Let the rest be as it may happen; it makes no differ- 
ence to me. 


THE ENCHIRIDION, OR MANUAL. 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 


I. 


THERE are things which are within our power, 
and there are things which are beyond our 
power. Within our power are opinion, aim, desire, 
aversion, and, in one word, whatever affairs are our 
own. Beyond our power are body, property, reputa- 
tion, office, and, in one word, whatever are not prop- 
erly our own affairs. 

Now the things within our power are by nature 
free, unrestricted, unhindered ; but those beyond our 
power are weak, dependent, restricted, alien. Re- 
member then, that, if you attribute freedom to things 
by nature dependent, and take what belongs to oth- 
ers for your own; you will be hindered, you will 
lament, you will be disturbed, you will find fault 
both with Gods and men. But if you take for your 
own only that which is your own, and view what be- 
longs to others just as it really is, then no one will 
ever compel you, no one will restrict you, you will 
find fault with no one, you will accuse no one, you 
will do nothing against your will; no one will hurt 
you, you will not have an enemy, nor will you suffer 
any harm. 

Aiming therefore at such great things, remember 
that you must not allow yourself any inclination, 
however slight, towards the attainment of the others ; 
but that you. must entirely quit some of them, and 


876 THE ENCHIRIDION. 


for the present postpone the rest. But if you would 
have these, and possess power and wealth likewise, 
you may miss the latter in seeking the former; and 
you will certainly fail of that, by which alone happi- 
ness and freedom are procured. 

Seek at once, therefore, to be able to say to every 
unpleasing semblance, “‘ You are but a semblance and 
by no means the real thing.” And then examine it 
by those rules which you have; and first and chiefly, 
by this: whether it concerns the things which are 
within our own power, or those which are not; and 
if it concerns anything beyond our power, be pre- 
pared to say that it is nothing to you. 


IL. 


Remember that desire demands the attainment of 
that of which you are desirous; and aversion de- 
mands the avoidance of that to which you are averse; 
that he who fails of the object of his desires, is disap- 
pointed ; and he who incurs the object of his aver- 
sion, is wretched. If, then, you shun only those 
undesirable things which you can control, you will 
never incur anything which you shun. But if you 
shun sickness, or death, or poverty, you will run 
the risk of wretchedness.' Remove aversion, then, 
from all things that are not within our power, and 
transfer it to things undesirable, which are within 
our power. But for the present altogether restrain 
desire; for if you desire any of the things not within 
our own power, you must necessarily be disappointed ; 
and you are not yet secure of those which are within 
our power, and so are legitimate objects of desire. 
Where it is practically necessary for you to pursue 
or avoid anything, do even this with discretion, and 
gentleness, and moderation. 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 377 


In. 

With regard to whatever objects either delight the 
mind, or contribute to use, or are tenderly beloved, 
remind yourself of what nature they are, beginning 
with the merest trifles: if you have a favorite cup, 
that it is a cup of which you are fond; for thus, if it 
is broken, you can bear it: if you embrace your 
child, or your wife, that you embrace a mortal; and 
thus, if either of them dies, you can bear it. 


Iv. 

When you set about any action, remind yourself 
of what nature the action is. If you are going to 
bathe, represent to yourself the incidents usual in 
the bath; some persons pouring out, others pushing 
in, others scolding, others pilfering. And thus you 
will more safely go about this action, if you say to 
yourself, “I will now go to bathe, and keep my own 
will in harmony with nature.” And so with regard 
to every other action. For thus, if any impediment 
arises in bathing, you will be able to say, “Jt was not 
only to bathe that I desired, but to keep my will in 
harmony with nature; and I shall not keep it thus, 
if I am out of humor at things that happen.” 


Vv. 

Men are disturbed not by things, but by the views 
which they take of things. Thus death is nothing 
terrible, else it would have appeared so to Socrates. 
But the terror consists in our notion of death, that it 
is terrible. When, therefore, we are hindered, or 
disturbed, or grieved, let us never impute it to oth- 
ers, but to ourselves; that is, to our own views. It 
is the action of an uninstructed person to reproach 


3878 THE ENCHIRIDION. 


others for his own misfortunes ; of one entering upon 
instruction, to reproach himself; and of one perfectly 
instructed, to reproach neither others nor himself. 


VI. 

Be not elated at any excellence not your own. If 
a horse should be elated, and say, “ I am handsome,” 
it might be endurable. But when yon are elated, 
and say, “I have a handsome horse,”’ know that you 
are elated only on the merit of the horse. What, 
then, is your own? The use of the phenomena of 
existence. So that when you are in harmony with 
nature in this respect, you will be elated with some 
reason; for you will be elated at some good of your 
own. 

Vil. 

As in a voyage, when the ship is at anchor, if you 
goon shore to get water, you may amuse yourself 
with picking up a shell-fish or a truffle in your way; 
but your thoughts ought to be bent towards the ship, 
and perpetually attentive, lest the captain should 
call; and then you must leave all these things, that 
you may not have to be carried on board the vessel, 
bound like a sheep. Thus likewise in life, if, instead 
of a truffle or shell-fish, such a thing as a wife or a 
child be granted you, there is no objection ; but if 
the captain calls, run to the ship, leave all these 
things, and never look behind. But if you are old, 
never go far from the ship, lest you should be miss- 
ing when called for. 


VII. 


Demand not that events should happen as you 
wish ; but wish them to happen as they do happen, 
and you will go on well. 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 379 
. xX 

Sickness is an impediment to the body, but not to 
the will, unless itself pleases. Lameness is an imped- 
iment to the leg, but not to the will; and say this to 
yourself with regard to everything that happens. 
For you will find it to be an impediment to some- 

thing else, but not truly to yourself. 


x. 

Upon every accident, remember to turn towards 
yourself and inquire what faculty you have for its 
use. Ifyou encounter a handsome person, you will 
find continence. the faculty needed ; if pain, then for- 
titude ; if reviling, then patience. And when thus 
habituated, the phenomena of existence will not over- 
whelm you. 

Xi. ; 

Never say of anything, “I have lost it’; but, “I 
have restored it.” Has your child died? It is re- 
stored. Has your wife died? She is restored. Has 
your estate been taken away? That likewise is re- 
stored. ‘ But it was a bad man who took it.” What 
is it to you, by whose hands He who gave it hath 
demanded it again? While He permits you to pos- 
sess it, hold it as something not your own; as do 
travellers at an inn. 


Xi. 

If you would improve, lay aside such reasonings 
as these: “If I neglect my affairs, I shall not have 
a maintenance; if I do not punish my servant, he 
will be good for nothing.” For it were better to die 
of hunger, exempt from grief and fear, than to live 
in affluence with perturbation ; and it is better that 
your servant should be bad than you unhappy. 


380 THE ENCHIRIDION. 


Begin therefore with little things. Is a little oil 
spilt or a little wine stolen? Say to yourself, “‘ This 
is the price paid for peace and tranquillity ; and noth- 
ing is to be had for nothing.” And when you call 
your servant, consider that it is possible he may not 
come at your call; or, if he does, that he may not do 
what you wish. But it is not at all desirable for him, 
and very undesirable for you, that it should be in his 
power to cause you any disturbance. 


XTi. 

If you would improve, be content to be thought 
foolish and dull with regard to externals. Do not 
desire to be thought to know anything ; and though 
you should appear to others to be somebody, distrust 
yourself. For be assured, it is not easy at once to 
keep your will in harmony with nature, and to secure 
externals; but while you are absorbed in the one, 
you must of necessity neglect the other. 


XIV. 

If you wish your children, and your wife, and your 
friends, to live forever, you are foolish ; for you wish 
things to be in your power which are not so; and 
what belongs to others, to be your own. So likewise, 
if you wish your servant to be without fault, you are 
foolish ; for you wish vice not to be vice, but some- 
thing else. But if you wish not to be disappointed 
in your desires, that is in your own power. Exer- 
cise, therefore, what is in your power. A man’s mas- 
ter is he who is able to confer or remove whatever 
that man seeks or shuns. Whoever then would be 
free, let him wish nothing, let him decline nothing, 
which. depends on others; else he must_necessarily 
be a slave. 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 381 


XV. 


Remember that you must behave as at a banquet. 
Is anything brought round to you? Put out your 
hand, and take a moderate share. Does it pass by 
you? Do not stopit. Isit not yet come? Do not 
yearn in desire towards it, but wait till it reaches you. 
So with regard to children, wife, office, riches; and 
you will some time or other be worthy to feast with 
the Gods. And if you do not so much as take the 
things which are set before you, but are able even to 
forego them, then you will not only be worthy to 
feast with the Gods, but to rule with them also. For, 
by thus doing, Diogenes and Heraclitus, and others 
like them, deservedly became divine, and were so 
recognized. 


XVI. 

When you see any one weeping for grief, either 
that his son has gone abroad, or that he has suffered 
in his affairs; take care not to be overcome by the 
apparent evil. But discriminate, and be ready to 
say, “ What hurts this man is not this occurrence 
itself, for another man might not be hurt by it ;— 
but the view he chooses to take of it.” As far as con- 
versation goes, however, do not disdain to accommo- 
date yourself to him, and if need be, to groan with 
him. Take heed, however, not to groan inwardly 
too. 

XVI. 

Remember that you are an actor in a drama of 
such sort as the author chooses. If short, then in a 
short one; if long, then in a long one. If it be his 
pleasure that you should act a poor man, see that 
you act it well; or a cripple, or a ruler, or a pri- 


882 THE ENCHIRIDION. 


vate citizen. For this is your business, to act well 
the given part; but to choose it, belongs to another. 


XVI. 
When a raven happens to croak unluckily, be not 
overcome by appearances, but discriminate, and say, 
“Nothing is portended to me; but either to my pal- 
try body, or property, or reputation, or children, or 
wife. But to me all portents are lucky, if I will. 
For whatsoever happens, it belongs to me to derive 
advantage therefrom.” 


XIX. 

You can be unconquerable, if you enter into no 
combat, in which it is not in your own power to con- 
quer. When, therefore, you see any one eminent in 
honors or power, or in high esteem on any other ac- 
count, take heed not to be bewildered by appearances 
and to pronounce him happy; for if the essence of 
good consists in things within our own power, there 
will be no room for envy or emulation. But, for 
your part, do not desire to be a general, or a senator, 
or a consul, but to be free; and the only way to this 
is, a disregard of things which lie not within our own 
power. 

XxX. 

_ Remember that it is not he who gives abuse or 
blows who affronts; but the view we take of these 
things as insulting. When, therefore, any one pro- 
vokes you, be assured that it is your own opinion 
which provokes you. Try, therefore, in the first 
place, not to be bewildered by appearances. For if 
you once gain time and respite, you will more easily 
command yourself. 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 383 


xXxI. 

Let death and exile, and all other things which 
appear terrible, be daily before your eyes, but death 
chiefly; and you will never entertain any abject 
thought, nor too eagerly covet anything. 


XXII. 


If you have an earnest desire towards philosophy, 
prepare yourself from the very first to have the mul- 
titude laugh and sneer, and say, “ He is returned to 
us a philosopher all at once”; and “ Whence this 
supercilious look?”’ Now for your part, do not have 
a supercilious look indeed; but keep steadily to those 
things which appear best to you, as one appointed by 
God to this particular station. For remember that, 
if you are persistent, those very persons who at first 
ridiculed, will afterwards admire you. But if you 
are conquered by them, you will incur a double 
ridicule. 

XXIII. 

If you ever happen to turn your attention to exter- 
nals, for the pleasure of any one, be assured that you 
have ruined your scheme of life. Be contented, then, 
in everything, with being a philosopher; and, if you 
wish to seem so likewise to any one, appear so to 
yourself, and it will suffice you. 


XXIV. 

Let not such considerations as these distress you: 
“T shall live in discredit, and be nobody anywhere.” 
For if discredit be an evil, you can no more be in- 
volved in evil through another, than in baseness. Is 
it any business of yours, then, to get power, or to be 
admitted to an entertainment? By no means. How 


384. THE ENCHIRIDION. 


then, after all, is this discredit? And how is it true 
that you will be nobody anywhere ; when you ought 
to be somebody in those things only which are within 
your own power, in which you may be of the great- 
est consequence? ‘ But my friends will be unas- 
sisted.” What do you mean by unassisted? They 
will not have money from you; nor will you make 
them Roman citizens. Who told you, then, that 
these are among the things within our own power; 
and not rather the affairs of others? And who can 
give to another the things which he himself has not? 
“Well, but get them, then, that we too may have a 
share.” If I can get them with the preservation of 
my own honor, and fidelity, and self-respect, show 
me the way, and I will get them; but if you require 
me to lose my own proper good, that you may gain 
what is no good, consider how unreasonable and fool- 
ish you are. Besides, which would you rather have, 
a sum of money, or a faithful and honorable friend ? 
Rather assist me, then, to gain this character, than 
require me to do those things by which I may lose 
it. Well, but my country, say you, as far as depends 
upon me, will be unassisted. Here again, what as- 
sistance is this you mean? It will not have porticos 
nor baths of your providing? And what signifies 
that? Why, neither does a smith provide it with 
shoes, nor a shoemaker with arms. It is enough if 
every one fully performs his own proper business. 
And were you to supply it with another faithful and 
honorable citizen, would not he be of use to it? 
Yes. Therefore neither are you yourself useless to 
it. ‘What place then,” say you, “shall I hold in 
the state?”? Whatever you can hold with the pres- 
ervation of your fidelity and honor. But if, by de- 


JHE ENCHIRIDION. 385 


siring to be useful to that, you lose these, how can 
you serve your country, when you have become faith- 
less and shameless ? 


XXYV. 

Is any one preferred before you at an entertain- 
ment, or in courtesies, or in confidential intercourse ? 
Tf these things are good, you ought to rejoice that he 
has them; and if they are evil, do not be grieved 
that you have them not. And remember that you 
cannot be permitted to rival others in externals, with- 
out using the same means to obtain them. For how 
can he, who will not haunt the door of any man, will 
not attend him, will not praise him, have an equal 
share with him who does these things? You are 
unjust, then, and unreasonable, if you are unwilling 
to pay the price for which these things are sold, and 
would have them for nothing. For how much are 
lettuces sold? An obolus, for instance. If another, 
then, paying an obolus takes the lettuces, and you, 
not paying it, go without them, da not imagine that 
he has gained any advantage over you. For as he 
has the lettuces, so you have the obolus which you 
did not give. So, in the present case, you have not 
been invited to such a person’s entertainment; be 
cause you have not paid him the price for which a 
supper is sold. It is sold for praise; it is sold for 
attendance. Give him, then, the value, if it be for 
your advantage. But if you would at the same time 
not pay the one, and yet receive the other, you are 
unreasonable and foolish. Have you nothing, then, 
in place of the supper? Yes, indeed you have; not 
to praise him whom you do not like to praise; not 


to bear the insolence of his lackeys. 
25 


386 THE ENCHIRIDION. 


XXVI. 

The will of Nature may be learned from things 
upon which we are all agreed. As, when our neigh- 
bor’s boy has broken a cup, or the like, we are ready 
at once to say, “ These are casualties that will hap- 
pen.” Be assured, then, that when your own cup 
is likewise broken, you ought to be affected just as 
when another’s cup was broken. Now apply this to 
greater things. Is the child or wife of another dead? 
There is no one who would not say, ‘‘ This is an ac- 
cident of mortality.” But if any one’s own child 
happens to die, it is immediately, ‘ Alas! how wretch- 
ed amI!” Itshould be always remembered how we 
are affected on hearing the same thing concerning 
others. 

XXVIII. 

As a mark * is not set up for the sake of missing 
the aim, so neither does the nature of evil exist in 
the world. 

XXVIII 

If a person had delivered up your body to some 
. passer-by, you would certainly be angry. And do 
you feel no shame in delivering up your own mind 
to any reviler, to be disconcerted and confounded ? 


XXIX.} 


xXx, 


Duties are universally measured by relations. Is 
a certain man your father? In this are implied, tak- 


* Happiness, the effect of virtue, is the mark which God hath set 
up for us to aim at. Our missing it is no work of His; nor so prop- 
erly anything real, as a mere negative and failnre of our own. — C. 

{ This chapter, except some very trifling differences, is the same 
with the fifteenth of the third book of the Discourses, and therefore 
unnecessary to he repeated here. — C. 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 387 


ing care of him; submitting to him in all things ; 
patiently receiving his reproaches, his correction. 
But he is a bad father. Is your natural tie, then, to 
a good father? No, but to a father. Is a brother un- 
just? Well, preserve your own just relation towards 
him. Consider not what he does; but what you are 
to do, to keep your own'will in a state conformable 
to nature. For another cannot hurt you, unless you 
please. You will then be hurt when you consent to 
be hurt. In this manner, therefore, if you accustom 
yourself to contemplate the relations of neighbor, 
citizen, commander, you can deduce from each the 
corresponding duties. 


XXXI. 

Be assured that the essence of piety towards the 
Gods lies in this, to form right opinions concerning 
them, as existing, and as governing the universe 
justly and well. And fix yourself in this resolution, 
to obey them, and yield to them, and willingly follow 
them amidst all events, as being ruled by the most 
perfect wisdom. Yor thus you will never find fault 
with the Gods, nor accuse them of neglecting you. 
And it is not possible for this to be effected in any 
other way, than by withdrawing yourself from things 
which are not within our own power, and by making 
good or evil to consist only in those which are. For 
if you suppose any other things to be either good or 
evil, it is inevitable that, when you are disappointed 
of what you wish, or incur what you would avoid, 
you should reproach and blame their authors. For 
every creature is naturally formed to flee and abhor 
things that appear hurtful, and that which causes 
them; and to pursue and admire those which appear 


888 THE ENCHIRIDION. 


beneficial, and that which causes them. It is imprac 
ticable, then, that one who supposes“ himself to bi 
hurt, should rejoice in the person who, as he thinks 
hurts him ; just as it is impossible to rejoice in the 
hurt itself. Hence, also, a father is reviled by hi: 
son, when he does not impart the things which seen 
to be good; and this made Polynices and Eteocle: 
mutually enemies, that empire seemed good to both 
On this account the husbandman reviles the Gods ;— 
the sailor, the merchant, or those who have lost wift 
or child. For where our interest is, there too is piet) 
directed. So that whoever is careful to regulate his 
desires and aversions as he ought, is thus made 
careful of piety likewise. But it also becomes in 
cumbent on every one to offer libations, and sacri 
fices, and first-fruits, according to the customs of hi: 
country, purely, and not heedlessly nor negligently 
not avariciously, nor yet extravagantly. 


XXX. 

When you have recourse to divination, remembe1 
that you know not what the event will be, and yot 
come to learn it of the diviner ; but of what nature i 
is you knew before coming ; at least, if you are of 
philosophic mind. For if it is among the things no 
within our own power, it can by no means be eithe) 
good or evil. Do not, therefore, bring with you t 
the diviner either desire or aversion, — else you wil 
approach him trembling,— but first clearly under. 
stand, that every event is indifferent, and nothing i 
you, of whatever sort it may be; for it will be ir 
your power to make a right use of it, and this no onc 
ean hinder. Then come with confidence to the God; 
as your counsellors; and afterwards, when any coun: 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 889 


sel is given you, remember what counsellors you have 
assumed, and whose advice you will neglect, if you 
disobey. Come to divination, as Socrates prescribed, 
in cases of which the whole consideration relates to 
the event, and in which no opportunities are afforded 
by reason, or any other art, to discover the matter in 
view. When, therefore, it is our duty to share the 
danger of a friend or of our country, we ought not to 
consult the oracle as to whether we shall share it with 
them or not. For though the diviner should forewarn 
you that the auspices are unfavorable, this means no 
more than that either death or mutilation or exile ig 
portended. But we have reason within us; and it 
directs us, even with these hazards, to stand by our 
friend and our country. Attend, therefore, to the 
greater diviner, the Pythian God, who once cast out 
of the temple him who neglected to save his friend.* 


XXXII. 

Begin by prescribing to yourself some character 
and demeanor, such as you may preserve both alone 
and in company. 

Be mostly silent; or speak merely what is needful, 
and in few words. We may, however, enter spar- 
ingly into discourse sometimes, when occasion calls 
for it; but let it not run on any of the common 
subjects, as gladiators, or horse-races, or athletic 
champions, or food, or drink, —- the vulgar topics of 
conversation ; and especially not on men, so as either 
to blame, or praise, or make comparisons. If you are 


* This refera to an anecdote given in full by Simplicins, in his 
commentary on this passage, of a man assaulted and killed, on his 
way to consult the oracle, while his companion, deserting him, took 
refage in the temple, till cast out by the Deity: —H. 


390 THE ENCHIRIDION. 


able, then, by your own conversation, bring over 
that of your company to proper subjects; but if you 
happen to find yourself among strangers, be silent. 

Let not your laughter be loud, frequent, or abun- 
dant. . 

Avoid taking oaths, if possible, altogether ; at any 
rate, so far as you are able. 

Avoid public and vulgar entertainments; but if 
ever an occasion calls you to them, keep your atten- 
tion upon the stretch, that you may not impercepti- 
bly slide into vulgarity. For be assured that if a 
person be ever so pure himself, yet, if his companion 
be corrupted, he who converses with him will be cor- 
rupted likewise. 

Provide things relating to the body no farther than 
absolute need requires; as meat, drink, clothing, 
house, retinue. But cut off everything that looks 
towards show and luxury. 

‘Before marriage, guard yourself with all your abil- 
ity from unlawful intercourse with women; yet be 
not uncharitable or severe to those who are led into 
this, nor frequently boast that you yourself do other- 
wise. 

If any one tells you that such a persou speaks ill 
of you, do not make excuses about what is said of 
you, but answer: “He was ignorant of my other 
faults, else he would not have mentioned these alone.”’ 

It is not necessary for you to appear often at pub- 
lic spectacles; but if ever there is a proper occasion 
for you to be there, do not appear more solicitous for 
any other, than for yourself; that is, wish things to 
be only just as they are, and only the best man to 
win; for thus nothing will go against you. But ab- 
stain entirely from acclamations, and derision, and 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 391 


violent emotions. And when you come away, do not 
discourse a great deal on what has passed, and what 
contributes nothing to your own amendment. For it 
would appear by such discourse that you were daz- 
zled by the show. 

Be not prompt or ready to attend private recita- 
tions; but if you do attend, preserve your gravity 
and dignity, and yet avoid making yourself disagree- 
able. 

When you are going to confer with any one, and 
especially with one who seems your superior, repre- 
sent to yourself how Socrates or Zeno would behave 
in such a case, and you will not be at a loss to meet 
properly whatever may occur. 

When you are going before any one in power, 
fancy to yourself that you may not find him at home, 
that you may be shut out, that the doors may not be 
opened to you, that he may not notice you. If, with 
all this, it be your duty to go, bear what happens, 
and never say to yourself, “It was not worth. so 
much.” For this is vulgar, and like a man bewil- 
dered by externals. 

In society, avoid a frequent and excessive mention 
of your own actions and dangers. For however 
agreeable it may be to yourself to allude to the risks 
you have run, it is not equally agreeable to others to 
hear your adventures. Avoid likewise an endeavor 
to excite laughter. For this may readily slide you 
into vulgarity, and, besides, may be apt to lower you 
in the esteem of your acquaintance. Approaches to 
indecent discourse are likewise dangerous. There- 
fore when anything of this sort happens, use the first 
fit opportunity to rebuke him who makes advances 
that way; or, at least, by silence, and blushing, and 


392 THE ENCHIRIDION. 


a serious look, show yourself to be displeased by. such 
talk. 
XXXIV. 

If you are dazzled by the semblance of any prom- 
ised pleasure, guard yourself against being bewil- 
dered by it; but let the affair wait your leisure, and 
procure yourself some delay. Then bring to your 
mind both points of time; that in which you shail 
enjoy the pleasure, and that in which you will repent 
and reproach yourself, after you have enjoyed it; and 
set before you, in opposition to these, how you will 
rejoice and applaud yourself, if you abstain. And 
even though it should appear to you a seasonable 
gratification, take heed that its enticements and al- 
lurements and seductions may net subdue you; but 
set in opposition to this, how much better it is to be 
conscious of having gained so great a victory. 


XXKV. 

When you do anything from a clear judgment that 
it ought to be done, never shrink from being seen to 
do it, even though the world should misunderstand 
it; for if you are not acting rightly, shun the action 
itself; if you are, why fear those who wrongly cen- 
sure you? . 

XXXVI 

As the proposition, either i is day, or it is night, 
has much force in a disjunctive argument, but none 
at all in a conjunctive one; so, at a feast, to choose 
the largest share, is very suitable to the bodily appe- 
tite, but utterly inconsistent with the social spirit of 
the entertainment. Remember, then, when you eat 
with another, not only the value to the body of those 
things which are set before you, but also the value of 
proper courtesy towards your host. 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 893 


XXXVI. 
If you have assumed any character beyond your 
strength, you have both demeaned yourself ill in that, 
and quitted one which you might have supported. 


XXXVHOI. 

As in walking you take care not to tread upon a 
nail, or turn your foot, so likewise take care not to 
hurt the ruling faculty of your mind. And if we 
were to guard against this in every action, we should 
enter upon action more safely. 


KXXTX. 

The body is to every one the proper measure of its 
possessions, as the foot is of the shoe. If, therefore, 
you stop at this, you will keep the measure; but if 
you move beyond it, you must necessarily be carried 
forward, as down a precipice; as in the case of a 
shoe, if you go beyond its fitness to the foot, it comes 
first to be gilded, then purple, and then studded with 
jewels. For to that which once exceeds the fit meas- 
ure there is no bound. 


XL. 

Women from fourteen years old are flattered by 
men with the title of mistresses. Therefore, perceiv- 
ing that they are regarded only as qualified to give 
men pleasure, they begin to adorn themselves, and in 
that to place all their hopes. It is worth while, 
therefore, to try that they may perceive themselves 
honored only so far as they appear beautiful in their 
demeanor, and modestly virtuous. 


894 THE ENCHIRIDION. 


XU. 

It is a mark of want of intellect, to spend much 
time in things relating to the body; as to be immod- 
erate in exercises, in eating and drinking, and in the 
discharge of other animal functions. These things 
should be done incidentally and our main strength 
be applied to our reason. 


XLIL. 


When any person does ill by you, or speaks ill of 
you, remember that he acts or speaks from an im- 
pression that it is right for him to do so. Now, it is 
not possible that he should follow what appears right 
to you, but only what appears so to himself. There- 
fore, if he judges from false appearances, he is the 
person hurt; since he too is the person deceived. 
For if any one takes a true proposition to be false, 
the proposition is not hurt, but only the man is 
deceived. Setting out, then, from these principles, 
you will meekly bear with a person who reviles you; 
for you will say upon every occasion, “It seemed so 
to him.” 

XLIM. 

Everything has two handles: one by which it may 
be borne; another by which it cannot. If your 
brother acts unjustly, do not lay hold on the affair by 
the handle of his injustice; for by that it cannot be 
borne: but rather by the opposite, that he is your 
brother, that he was brought up with you; and thus 
you will lay hold on it as it is to be borne. 


XLIV. 


These reasonings have no logical connection: “I 
am richer than you; therefore I am your superior”: 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 895 


“Tam more eloquent than you; therefore J am your 
superior.” The true logical connection is rather 
this: “J am richer than you; therefore my posses- 
sions must exceed yours”: “I am more eloquent 
than you; therefore my style must surpass yours.” 
But you, after all, consist neither in property nor in 
style. ; 
XLV. 

Does any one bathe hastily? Do not say, that he 
does it ill, but hastily. Does any one drink much 
wine? Do not say that he does ill, but that he 
drinks a great deal. For unless you perfectly under- 
stand his motives, how should you know if he acts 
ill? Thus you will not risk yielding to any appear- 
ances but such as you fully comprehend. 


XLVI. 


Never proclaim yourself a philosopher; nor make 
much talk among the ignorant about your principles, 
but show them by actions. Thus, at an entertain- 
ment, do not discourse how people ought to eat; but 
eat as you ought. For remember that thus Socrates 
also universally avoided all ostentation. And when 
persons came to him, and desired to be introduced 
by him to philosophers, he took them and introduced 
them; so well did he bear being overlooked. So 
if ever there should be among the ignorant any 
discussion of principles, be for the most part silent. 
For there is great danger in hastily throwing out 
what is undigested. And if any one tells you that 
you know nothing, and you are not nettled at it, then 
you may be sure that you have really entered on your 
work. For sheep do not hastily throw up the grass, 
to show the shepherds how much they have eaten ; 


396 THE ENCHIRIDION. 


but, inwardly digesting their food, they produce it 
outwardly in wool and milk. Thus, therefore, do 
you not make an exhibition before the ignorant of 
your principles; but of the actions to which their 
digestion gives rise. 


XLVII. 

When you have learned to nourish your body 
frugally, do not pique yourself upon it; nor, if you 
drink water, be saying upon every occasion, “ I drink 
water.” But first consider how much more frugal 
are the poor than we, and how much more patient of 
hardship. But ifat any time you would inure your- 
self by exercise to labor and privation, for your own 
sake and not for the public, do not attempt great 
feats; but when you are violently thirsty, just rinse 
your mouth with water, and tell nobody. 


XLVIi. 

The condition and characteristic of a vulgar person 
is, that he never looks for either help or harm from 
himself, but only from externals. The condition and 
characteristic of a philosopher is, that he looks to 
himself for all help or harm. The marks of a pro- 
ficient are, that he censures no one, praises no one, 
blames no one, accuses no one; says nothing concern- 
ing himself as being anybody, or knowing anything: 
when he is in any instance hindered or restrained, he 
accuses himself; and if he is praised, he smiles to 
himself at the person who praises him; and if he is 
censured, he makes no defence. But he goes about 
with the caution of a convalescent, careful of inter- 
ference with anything that is doing well, but not 
yet quite secure. He restrains desire; he transfers 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 397 


his aversion to those things only which thwart the 
proper use of our own will; he employs his energies 
moderately in all directions; if he appears stupid or 
ignorant, he does not care; and, in a word, he keeps 
watch over himself as over an enemy and one in am- 
bush. 

XLIX. 

When any one shows himself vain, on being able 
to understand and interpret the works of Chrysippus, 
say to yourself: “Unless Chrysippus had written 
obscurely, this person would have had nothing to be 
vain of. But what do I desire? To understand 
Nature, and follow her. I ask, then, who interprets 
her; and hearing that Chrysippus does, I have re- 
course to him. I do not understand his writings. 
I seek, therefore, one to interpret them.” So far 
there is nothing to value myself upon. And when 
I find an interpreter, what remains is, to make use 
of his instructions. This alone is the valuable thing. 
But if I admire merely the interpretation, what do I 
become more than a grammarian, instead of a philos- 
opher? Except, indeed, that instead of Homer I 
interpret Chrysippus. When any one, therefore, de- 
sires me to read Chrysippus to him, I rather blush, 
when I cannot exhibit actions that are harmonious 
and consonant with his discourse. 


L. 

Whatever rules you have adopted, abide by them 
as laws, and as if you would be impious to transgress 
them ; and do not regard what any one says of you, 
for this, after all, is no concern of yours. How long, 
then, will you delay to demand of yourself the no- 
blest improvements, and in no instance to transgress 


398 THE ENCHIRIDION. 


the judgments of reason? ‘You have received the 
philosophic principles with which you ought to be 
conversant; and you have been conversant with them. 
For what other master, then, do you wait as an ex- 
cuse for this delay in self-reformation? You are no 
longer a boy, but a grown man. If, therefore, you 
will be negligent and slothful, and always add pro- 
crastination to procrastination, purpose to purpose, 
and fix day after day in which you will attend to 
yourself, you will insensibly continue to accomplish 
nothing, and, living and dying, remain of vulgar 
mind. This instant, then, think yourself worthy of 
living as a man grown up and a proficient. Let 
whatever appears to be the best, be to you an invio- 
lable law. And if any instance of pain or pleasure, 
glory or disgrace, be set before you, remember that 
now is the combat, now the Olympiad comes on, nor 
can it be put off; and that by one failure and defeat 
honor may be lost—or won. Thus Socrates became 
perfect, improving himself by everything; following 
reason alone. And though you are not yet-a Socra- 
tes, you ought, however, to live as one seeking to be 
a Socrates. 
LI. 

The first and most necessary topic in philosophy is 
the practical application of principles; as, We ought 
not to lie: the second is that of demonstrations; as, 
Why it is that we ought not to lie: the third, that 
which gives strength and logical connection to the 
other two; as, Why this is a demonstration. For what 
is demonstration? What is a consequence? What. 
a contradiction? What truth? What falsehood ? 
The third point is then necessary on account of the 
second ; and the second on account of the first. But 


THE ENCHIRIDION. 899 


the most necessary, and that whereon we ought to 
rest, is the first. But we do just the contrary. For 
we spend all our time on the third point, and employ 
all our diligence about that, and entirely neglect the « 
first. Therefore, at the same time that we lie, we 
are very ready to show how it is demonstrated that 
lying is wrong. 
Lit 
Upon all occasions we ought to have these maxims 

ready at hand : — 

Conduct me, Zeus, and thou, O Destiny, 

Wherever your decrees have fixed my lot. 


I follow cheerfully ; and, did I not, 
Wicked and wretched, I must follow still.* 


Whoe’er yields properly to Fate is deemed 
Wise among men, and knows the laws of Heaven.t 


And this third : — 
“Q Crito, if it thus pleases the gods, thus let it 
be.” “ Anytus and Melitus may kill me indeed; 


but hurt me they cannot.’’$ 


* Cleanthes, in Diogenes Laertins, quoted also by Seneca, Epis- 
tle 107. — H. 

¢ Euripides, Fragments. — H. 

t Plato, Crito, § 17; Apology, § 18.—H. 


FRAGMENTS OF EPICTETUS. 


FRAGMENTS OF EPICTETUS 


FROM 
STOBAUS, ANTONIUS, AND MAXIMUS.* 
——— 


I. 
LIFE at odds with Fortune resembles a wintry 
torrent; for it is turbulent and muddy and 
difficult to pass, and violent and noisy and brief. 

A soul conversant with virtue resembles a perpet- 
ual fountain ; for it is clear and gentle and agreeable 
and sweet and serviceable and rich and harmless 
and innocent. 

I. 
If you would be good, first believe that you are bad. 


IT. 

It is better sometimes frankly to offend, and act 
often wisely, than to say we seldom err and offend 
frequently. 

Ty. 

Chastise your passions, that they may not chastise 
you. 

* Stobens lived early in the fifth century, Maximns in the sev- 
enth, and Antonius, surnamed Melissa, or the Bee, in the eighth. 


Their collections are printed together. Many of these sayings are 
merely traditional. — H. 


404 FRAGMENTS. 


Vv. 
Be not so much ashamed of what is inglorious, as 
studious to shun what is untruthful. 


VI. 

If you would be well spoken of, learn to speak well 
of others. And when you have learned to speak well, 
endeavor likewise to do well; and thus you will reap 
the fruit of being well spoken of. 


Vu. 

Freedom and slavery are merely names of virtue 
and of vice; and both these are matters of will. But 
neither of them belongs to things in which will has 
no share. But Fortune is accustomed to dispose at 
her pleasure of the body, and those things relating 
to the body in which will has no share. For no one 
is a slave whose will is free. 

Fortune is an evil chain to the body, and vice to 
the soul. For he whose body is unbound, and whose 
soul is chained, is a slave. On the contrary, he 
whose body is chained, and his soul unbound, is free. 
The chain of the body, Nature unbinds by death, or 
baseness for money; the chain of the soul, virtue 
unbinds by wisdom and experience and philosophic 
training. 

VII. 

If you would live tranquil and contented, endeavor 
that all who live with you may be good. And you 
can have them good by instructing the willing and 
dismissing the unwilling. For sin and bondage will 
fly with those who leave you, and with those who 
remain with you will virtue and liberty be left. 


FRAGMENTS. 405 


IX. 
It is scandalous, that he who sweetens his drink by 
the gift of the bees, should by vice embitter reason, 
the gift of the Gods. 


x. 


No one who is a lover of money, a lover of pleas- 
ure, or a lover of glory, is likewise a lover of man- 
kind ; but only he who is a lover of virtue. 


XI. 

As you would not wish to sail in a large and ele- 
gant and gilded ship, and sink ; so neither is it desir- 
able to inhabit a grand and sumptuous house, and be 
in a tumult. 

Xi. 

When we are invited to an entertainment we take 
what we find; and if any one should bid the master 
of the house set fish or tarts before him, he would be 
thought absurd, Yet in the world we ask the Gods 
for what they do not give us; and that, though there 
are so many things which they have given us. 


XIII. 

They are pretty fellows indeed, said he, who value 
themselves on things not in our own power. Tama 
better man than you, says one; for I have many es- 
tates, and you are pining with hunger. I have been 
consul, says another; I am a ruler, says a third; and 
I have a fine head of hair, says a fourth. Yet one 
horse does not say to another, “I am better than 
you; for I have a great deal of hay and a great deal 
of oats; and I have a gold bridle and embroidered 
trappings’; but only, “I am swifter than you.” 
And every creature is better or worse from its own 


406: FRAGMENTS. 


good or bad qualities. Is man, then, the only crea- 
ture which has no natural good quality? And must 
we take account of hair, and clothes, and ancestors ? 


xIV. 

Patients are displeased with a physician who does 
not prescribe to them; and think he gives them over. 
Aud why are none so affected towards a philosopher 
as to conclude that he despairs-of their recovery to a 
right way of thinking, if he tells them nothing for 
their good ? 

XV. 

They who have a good. constitution of body can 
bear heat and cold; and so they who have a right 
constitution of soul can meet anger and grief andi 
immoderate joy and the other passions. 

XVI. 

Examine yourself, whether you had rather be rich- 
or happy; and if rich, be assured that this is neither 
a good, nor altogether in your own power; but if 
happy, that this is both a good, and in your own: 
power; since the one is a temporary loan of Fortune, 
and the other depends on will. 


XVII. 

As when you see a viper, or an asp, or a scorpion, 
in a box of ivory or gold, you do not love itor think 
it happy because of the magnificence of the material 
in which it is enclosed; but you shun and detest it, 
because it is of a pernicious nature: so, likewise, 
when you see vice lodged in the midst of wealth, and 
the swelling pride of fortune, be not struck: by the 
splendor of the material with which it is stirrounded; 
but despise the base alloy of its manners. 


FRAGMENTS. A407 


XVII. 

Riches are not among the number of things which 
are good; prodigality is of the number of those 
which are evil; modesty of those which are good. 
Now modesty invites to frugality and the acquisition 
of things that are good; but riches invite to prodigal~ 
ity and seduce from modesty. It is difficult, there- 
fore, for a rich person to be:'modest, or a modest per- 
son rich. 

xix, 

If you had been born and bred in a ship; you: 
would not be impatient to become the pilot. For 
you are not necessarily identified with the ship there, 
nor with riches here; but with’ reason everywhere. 
That therefore which is natural. and congenial to you, 
reason, think likewise to be peculiarly your own, and’ 
take care of it. 

xXx, 

If you were born in Persia, you would not en- 
deavor to live in Greece; but to be happy in the. 
place where you were. Why, then, if you are born 
in poverty, do you yearn to be rich, and not rather 
to be happy in the condition where you are ? 


XXxI. 

As it is better to lie straitened for room upon 4 
little couch, in health, than to toss upon a wide bed in 
sickness, so it is better to contract yourself within the 
compass of a small fortune, and be happy, than to 
have a great one and be wretched. 


XXII. 


It is not poverty that causes sorrow, but covetous 
desires; nor do riches deliver from fear, but only rea- 


408 FRAGMENTS. 


soning. If therefore you acquire a habit of reason- 
ing, you will neither desire riches, nor complain of 


poverty. 
XXII. 


A horse is not elated, and does not value himself 
on his fine stable or trappings or saddle-cloths, nor a 
bird on the warm materials of its nest; but the 
former on the swiftness of his feet, and the latter of 
its wings. Do not you, therefore, glory in your food 
or dress; or in short any external advantage ; but 
in integrity and beneficence. 


XXIV. 

There is a difference between living well and living 
profusely. The one arises from contentment and 
order and propriety and frugality; the other from 
dissoluteness and luxury and disorder and indecency. 
In short, to the one belongs true praise ; to the other, 
censure. If therefore you would live well, do not 
seek to be praised for profuseness. 


XXV. 

Let the first satisfaction of appetite be always the 
measure to you of eating and drinking; and appetite 
itself the sauce and the pleasure. Thus you will 
never take more than is necessary, nor will you want 
cooks; and you will be contented with whatever 
drink falls in your way. 


XXVI1. 

Consider that you do not thrive merely by the food 
in your stomach ; but by the elevation of your soul. 
For the former, as you see, is evacuated and carried 
off altogether; but the latter, though the soul be 
parted, remains uncorrupted through all things. 


FRAGMENTS. 409 


XXXVI. 

In every feast remember that there are two guests 
to be entertained, the body and the soul; and that 
what you give the body you presently lose, but what 
you give the soul remains forever. 


XXVIO. 

Do not mingle anger with profusion, and set them 
before your guests. Profusion, when it has made 
its way through the body, is quickly gone; but an- 
ger, when it has penetrated the soul, abides for a 
long time. Take care not to pay a great price 
merely to be transported with anger, and affront 
your guests; but rather delight them at a cheap. 
rate by gentle behavior. 


XXIX. 

Take care at your meals that the attendants be 
not more in number than those whom they are to 
attend. For it is absurd that many persons should 
wait on a few chairs. 


xxx. 

It would be best if, both while you are personally 
making your preparations and while you are feasting 
at table, you could give among the servants part of 
what is before you. But if such a thing be difficult 
at that time, remember that you, who are not weary, 
are attendéd by those who are; you who are eating 
and drinking, by those who are not; you who are 
talking, by those who are silent; you who are at 
ease, by those who are under constraint: and thus 
you will never be heated into any unreasonable pas- 
sion yourself, nor do any mischief by provoking an- 
other. 


410 FRAGMENTS. 


XXXI. 

Strife and contention are always absurd, but par- 
ticularly unbecoming at table conversations. For a 
person warmed with wine will never either teach, or 
be convinced by, one who is sober. And wherever 
sobriety is wanting, the end will show that you bave 
exerted yourself to no purpose. 


XXXII. 

Grasshoppers are musical; but snails are dumb. 
The latter rejoice in being wet; and the former in 
being warm. Then the dew calls out the one race, 
and for this they come forth; but, on the contrary, 
the noonday sun awakens the others, and in this they 
sing. If therefore you would be a musical and har- 
monious person, whenever the soul is bedewed with 
wine at drinking-parties, suffer her not to go forth 
and defile herself. But when. in rational society she 
glows by the beams of reason, then command her to 
speak from inspiration, and utter the oracles of justice. 


XXX. 

Consider him with whom you converse in one of 
these three ways; either as your superior, or inferior, 
or equal. If superior, you ought to hear him and be 
convinced ; if inferior, to convince him; if equal, to 
agree with him; and thus you will never be led into 
the love of strife. 

XXXIV. 

It is better, by yielding to truth, to conquer preju- 
dice, than by yielding to principle to be defeated by 
truth. 

XXXV. 


If you seek truth, you will not seek merely victory 


FRAGMENTS. 411 


at all hazards; and when you have found truth, you 
will have a security against: being. conquered. 


XXXVI 


Truth conquers by itself; Bese: by appealing 
to externals. 

XXXVI 

It is better, through living with one free person, to 
be fearless and free, than to be a slave in company 
with many. 

XXXVII. 

What you avoid suffering yourself, seek not to im- 
pose on others. You avoid slavery, for instance ; 
take care: not to enslave. For if you can beat to 
exact slavery from others, you appear to have been 
yourself a slave. For vice has nothing in common 
with virtue, nor freedom with slavery. As a person 
in' health would not wish to bé attended by the sick, 
nor to have those who live with him in a state of 
sickness; so neither would a person who is free bear 
to be served by slaves, nor to have those who live 
with him in a state of slavery. 


XXXIX. 

Whoever you are that would live apart from slaves, 
deliver yourself from slavery. And you will be free 
if you deliver yourself from appetite. For neither 
was Aristides called just, nor Epaminondas divine, 
nor Lycurgus a preserver, because they were rich 
and slave-holders ; but because, béing poor, they de- 
livered Greece from slavery. 


x. 
If you would have your house securely inhabited, 


412. FRAGMENTS. 


imitate the Spartan Lycurgus. And as he did not en- 
close his city with walls, but fortified the inhabitants 
with virtue, and preserved the city always free; so 
do you, likewise, not surround yourself with a great 
court-yard, nor raise high towers, but strengthen 
those who live with you by benevolence, and fidelity, 
and friendship.. And thus nothing hurtful will enter, 
even if the whole band of wickedness be set in array 
against it. 
XII. 

Do not hang your house round with tablets and 
pictures; but adorn it with virtue. For those are 
merely foreign and a fading deception of the eyes ; 
but this, a congenial and indelible and perpetual orna- 
ment to the house. 


XLII. 


Instead of herds of oxen, endeavor to assemble 
flocks of friends about your house. 


XLII. 

As a wolf resembles a dog, so much does a flatterer, 
an adulterer, a parasite, resemble a friend. Take heed 
therefore, that instead of guardian dogs, you do not 
inadvertently admit ravening wolves. 


XLIV. 

To seek admiration by adorning one’s house with 
stucco belongs to a tasteless man; but to adorn our 
characters by the charm of an amiable nature shows 
at once a lover of beauty and a lover of man. 


XLV. 
If you chiefly admire little things, you will never 


FRAGMENTS. 413 


be held worthy of great ones; but if you are above 
little things, you will be held greatly worthy. 


XLVI. 
Nothing is meaner than the love of pleasure, the 
love of gain, and insolence. Nothing is nobler than 
magnanimity, meekness, and philanthropy. 


XLVI. 

[We represent] those intractable philosophers who 
do not think pleasure to be in itself the natural state of 
man ; but merely an incident of those things in which 
his natural state consists, — justice, moderation, and 
freedom. Why, then, should the soul rejoice and 
be glad in the minor blessings of the body, as Epicu- 
rus says, and not be pleased with its own good, which 
is the very greatest? And yet Nature has given me 
likewise a sense of shame; and I am covered with 
blushes when I think I have uttered any indecent 
expression. This emotion will not suffer me to recog- 
nize pleasure as a good and the end of life. 


XLVI. 

The ladies at Rome have Plato’s Republic in their 
hands, because he allows a community of wives ; for 
they attend merely to the words of the author, and 
not to his sense. For he does not first order one man 
and one woman to marry and live together, and then 
allow a community of wives; but he abolishes that 
system of marriage, and introduces one of another 
kind. And, in general, men are pleased in finding 
out excuses for their own faults. Yet philosophy 
says, it is not fit even to move a finger without some 
reason. 


A14 FRAGMENTS. 


XLIx. 
It is the rarest pleasures which especially delight 
us. 
L. 
Once exceed moderation, and the most delightful 
things may become the most undelightful. 


LI. 

Agrippinus was justly entitled to praise on this 
account, that, though he was a man of the highest 
worth, he never praised himself; but blushed, even 
if another praised him. And he was a man of such 
a character, as to commend every untoward event 
that befell him: if he was feverish, the fever ; if dis- 
graced, the disgrace; if banished, the banishment. 
And, when once, as he was going to dine, a messen- 
ger brought him word that Nero ordered him to ban- 
ishment ; Well then, said Agrippinus, let us dine at 
Aricia.* 

Lo. 

Diogenes affirmed no labor to be good, unless the 
end were a due state and tone of the soul, and not of 
the body. 

LI. 

As a true balance is neither set right by a true one, 
nor judged by a false one; so likewise a just person 
has neither to beset right by just persons, nor to be 
judged by unjust ones. 


Lv. 


As what is straight needs no straightness, so what 
is just needs [to borrow] no justice. 


* The first stage on his journey into banishment. See note, 
ante, p. 7.—H. 


FRAGMENTS. 415 


LV. 

Give no judgment from another tribunal before 
you have yourself been judged at the tribunal of abso- 
lute justice. 

LVL. 

If you would give a just decision, heed neither par- 

ties nor pleaders, but the cause itself. 


LV. 


You will commit the fewest faults in judging, if 
you are faultless in your own life. 


LVI. 

It is better, by giving a just judgment, to be 
blamed by him who is deservedly condemned, than 
by giving an unjust judgment, to be justly censured 
by Nature. 

LIX. 

As the touchstone which tries gold, but is not 
itself tried by the gold; such is he, who has the 
standard of judgment. 


LX. 
It is scandalous for a judge to have to be judged by 
others. 
LXL 


As nothing is straighter than absolute straightness, 
so nothing is juster than absolute justice. 


: LXIt. 

Who among you does not admire the action of 
Lycurgus the Lacedemonian? For when he had 
been deprived of one of his eyes by one of the citi- 
zens, and the people had delivered the young man to 


416 FRAGMENTS. 


him, to be punished in whatever manner he should 
think proper, Lycurgus forbore to give him any pun- 
ishment. But having instructed him, and rendered 
him a good man, he brought him into the theatre ; 
and while the Lacedemonians were struck with admi- 
ration: ‘I received,” said he, “ this person from you, 
dangerous and violent, and I restore him to you gen- 
tle and a good citizen.” 


LXOI. 

When Pittacus had been unjustly treated by some 
person, and had the power of chastising him, he let 
him go, saying, “ Forgiveness is better than punish- 
ment; for the one is the proof ofa gentle, the other 
of a savage nature.” 

LXIv. 

This, above all, is the business of nature, to con- 
nect and apply the active powers to what appears fit 
and beneficial. 

LXV. 

It is the character of the most mean-spirited and 
foolish men, to suppose that they shall be despised by 
others, unless they somehow strike the first blow at 
their enemies. 

LXVIi. 

When you are going to attack any one with vehe. 
mence and threatening, remember to say first to 
yourself, that you are constituted gentle, and that by 
doing nothing violent, you will live without the need 
of repentance, and irreproachable. 


LXVH. 


We ought to know that it is not easy for a man to 
form his principles of action, unless he daily reiter- 


FRAGMENTS. 417 


ates and hears the same things, and at the same time 
applies them in action. 


LXVIi. 
Nicias was so intent on business, that he often 
asked his domestics whether he had bathed, and 
whether he had dined. 


LXIx. 

While Archimedes was intent on his diagrams, his. 
servants drew him away by violence, and anointed * 
him, and after his body was anointed, he traced his 
figures upon that. 


LXXx. 

When Lampis, the naval commander, was asked 
how he acquired wealth; he answered, that great 
wealth cost but little trouble, but that a little wealth 
[at the beginning] cost a great deal. 


LXXI. 

When Solon was silent at an entertainment, and 
was asked by Periander, whether he was silent for 
want of words, or from folly: “ No fool,” answered 
he, “ can be silent at a feast.” 


LXXIi. 

Consult nothing so much, upon every occasion, as 
discretion. Now it is more discreet to be silent than 
to speak; and to omit speaking whatever is not ac- 
companied with sense and reason. 


LXXIil. 
As light-honses in harbors, by kindling a great 


* The ancients anointed the body every day. — C. 
27 


418 FRAGMENTS. 


flame from a few faggots, afford a considerable assist- 
ance to ships wandering on the sea; so an illustrious 
person, in a state harassed by storms, confers great. 
benefits on his fellow-citizens, when himself contented 
with little. 

LXXIvV, 

You would certainly, if you undertook to steer a 
ship, learn the steersman’s art. And as in that case, 
you can steer the whole ship; so in another case, the 
whole state. 

LXXY. 

If you ‘have a mind to adorn your city by conse- 
crated monuments, first consecrate in yourself the 
most beautiful monument, of gentleness, and jus- 
tice, and benevolence. 

You will confer the greatest ‘benefits on your city, 
not by raising its roofs, but by exalting its souls. 
For it is better that great souls should live in small. 
habitations, than that abject slaves should burrow in 
great houses. 

LXXVin. 

Do not variegate the structure of your walls with 
Eubcean and Spartan stone; but adorn both the 
minds of the citizens and of ‘those who govern them 
by the Greek culture. For-cities.are made good hab- 
itations by the sentiments of those who ‘live in them, 
not by wood or stone. 

LXxvil. 

As, if you were to breed lions, you would not be 
solicitous about the magnificence of their dens, but 
about the qualities of the animals; so, if you under- 
take to preside over your fellow-citizens, be not so 


FRAGMENTS. 419 


solicitous about the magnificence of the buildings, as 
careful of the nobleness of those who inhabit them 


LXXIX, 

_ As a skilful manager of horses does not feed the 
good ¢olts, and suffer the unruly ones to starve ; but 
feeds them both alike, chastising the one more, to 
make him draw equally with his fellow; so a man 
of foresight and administrative skill endeavors to do 
good to the well-disposed citizens, but not at once to 
destroy those that are otherwise. He by no means 
denies subsistence to either of them ; only he disci- 
plines and urges on, with the greater vehemence, 
him who resists reason and the laws. 


LXxx. 
As a goose is not alarmed by hissing, nor a sheep 
by bleating ; so neither be you terrified by the vojce 
of a senseless multitude. | 


LXXXL 
As you do not comply with a multitude, when it 
unreasonably asks of you any part of your own prop- 
erty ; so neither be disconeerted before a mob, dq- 
manding of you any unjust compliance. 


LEXxg. 
Pay in advance your dues to the public, and you 
will never be asked for what is not due. 


LX XXII. 
As the sun waits not for prayers and incantations 
to be prevailed on to rise, but immediately shines 
forth, and is received with universal salutation ; so 


420 FRAGMENTS, 


neither do you wait for applauses and shouts and 
praises in order to do good; but be a voluntary bene- 
factor, and you will be beloved like the sun. 


LXXXIV. 
A ship ought not to be held by one anchor, nor 
life by a single hope. 


LXXXV. 


We ought not to stretch either our legs or our 
hopes for a point they cannot reach. 


LXXXVI. 
Thales, being asked what was the most universal 
possession, answered, “ Hope; for they have it who 
have nothing else.” 


LXXXVIil. 


It is more necessary for the soul to be healed than 
the body ; for it is better to die than to live ill. 


LXXXVII. 

Pyrrho used to say, “There is no difference be- 
tween living and dying.”’ A person asked him, Why 
then do you not die? “Because,” answered Pyrrho, 
“ there is no difference.” 


LXXXIX. 

Nature is admirable, and, as Xenophon says, ava- 
ricious of life. Hence we love and tend the body, 
which is of all things the most unpleasant and squal- 
id. For if we were obliged, for only five days, to 
take care of our neighbor’s body, we would not en- 
dure it. For only consider what it would be, when 
we rise in the morning, to clean the teeth of others, 


FRAGMENTS. 421 


and do all requisite offices hesides. In reality, it is 
wonderful that we should love a thing which every 
day demands so much attendance. I stuff this sack, 
and then I empty it again. What is more trouble- 
some? But I must obey God. Therefore I remain, 
and endure to wash and feed and clothe this poor 
body. When I was younger, he demanded of me 
still more, and I bore it. And when Nature, which 
gave the body, takes it away, will you not bear that? 
“T love it,’ say you. This is what I have just been 
observing ; and this very love has Nature given you, 
hut she also says, “ Now let it go, and have no fur- 
ther trouble.” 


XC. 

When a young man dies, some one blames the 
Gods that, at the time when he himself ought to be at 
rest, he is still encumbered with the troubles of life. 
Yet when death approaches, he wishes to live, and 
sends for the physician, and entreats him to omit no 
care or pains. It is marvellous that men should not 
be willing either to live or die. 


XCI. 


To a longer and worse life, a shorter and better is 
by all means to be preferred by every one. 


XCIl. 

When we are children, our parents deliver us to 
the care of a tutor; who is continually to watch over 
us that we get no hurt. When we are become men, 
God delivers us to the guardianship of an implanted 
conscience. We ought by no means, then, to despise 
this guardian ; for it will both displease God, and we 
shall be enemies to our own conscience. 


429, FRAGMENTS: 


XCIII. 
Riches ought to be used as the means to some 
end, and not lavished on every oceasion. 


XCIV. 

All men should wish rather for virtue than for 
wealth, which is dangerous to the foolish, since vice 
is increased by riches. And in proportion as any one 
is foolish, he becomes the more profuse, through hav- 
ing the means of gratifying his passion for pleasure. 


XOV. 
What ought not to be done, do not even think of 
doing. 
XCVI. 
Deliberate nich before you speak or aot; for what 
is once said or done you cannot reeall. 


XCVIL 
Every place is safe to him who dwells with justice. 


XCVIO. 
Crows pick out the eyés of the dead, when they 
are no longer of any use. But flatterers destroy the 
souls of the living by blinding their eyes. 


XCIK. 
The anger of 4 monkey and the threats of a flat- 
terer deserve equal regard. 


0. 
Kindly receive those who are willing to give good 
advice; but not those who upon evéry occasion are 
eager to flatter. For the former truly see what is 


FRAGMENTS. 438 


advantageous ; but the latter consider only the opin- 
ions of their superiors ; and imitate the shadows of 
bodies, nodding assent to what they say. 


cL 
An adviser ought, in the first, place, ta have a re- 
gard to the delicacy and sense of shame of the person 
admonished. For they who are beyond blushing are 
incorrigible. 
cI. 
It is better to advise than reproach ; for the one is 
mild and friendly, the other stern and severe; the 
one corrects the erring, the other only convicts them. 


Cin. 
Impart. to strangers and persons in need according 
to your ability. For he who gives nothing to the 
needy shall receive nothing in his own need. 


cIv. 

A person once brought clothes to a pirate, wha 
had been cast ashore, and almost killed by the sever- 
ity of the weather ; then carried him to his house, 
and furnished him with all necessaries. Being re- 
proached by some one for doing good to the evil; “TI 
have paid this regard,” answered he, “not to the 
man, but to humanity.” 


CV. 
We ought not to choose every pleasure ; but that 
whose end is good. 
CVI. 


It belongs to a wise man to resist pleasure ; and to 
a fool to be enslaved by it. 


44 FRAGMENTS. 


CVII. 
In all vice, pleasure, being presented like a bait, 
draws sensual minds to the hook of perdition. 


CVIII. 
Choose rather to punish your appetites than to be 
punished by them. 


CIx. 
No one is free who commands not himself. 


Cx. 
The vine bears three clusters ; the first of pleasure, 
the second of intoxication, the third of outrage. 


CxI. 


Do not talk much over wine to show your learn- 
ing; for your discourse will be unpleasing. 


° 


cxqI, 
He is a drunkard who takes more than three 
glasses; and though he be not drunk, he has ex- 
ceeded moderation. 


CxXIHI. 


Let discourse of God be renewed every day more 
surely than our food. 


.CXTV. 
Think of God oftener than you breathe. 


CXV. 

If you always remember that God stands by asa 
witness of whatever you do, either in soul or body, 
you will never err, either in your prayers or actions, 
and you will have God abiding with you. 


FRAGMENTS. 425 


CXVI. 
As it is pleasant to view the sea from the shore, so 
it is pleasant to one who has escaped, to remember 
his past labors. 


cxvil. 


Law aims to benefit human life; but it cannot, 
when men themselves choose to suffer, for it mani- 
fests its proper virtue on condition of obedience. 


CXVIII. 
As physicians are the preservers of the sick, so are 
the laws, of the injured. 


CXIXx. 
The justest laws are the truest. 


Cxx. 
It is decent to yield to a law, to aruler, and toa 
wiser man. 
CXXL 
Things done contrary to law are to be regarded as 
undone. 
CXXII. 
In prosperity it is very easy to find a friend ; in ad- 
versity, nothing is so difficult. 


‘ CXXIII. 


Time delivers fools from grief; and reason, wise 
men. 


CXXIV. 


He is a man of sense who does not grieve for what 
he has not, but rejoices in what he has. 


426 FRAGMENTS. 


CXXV. 

Epictetus being asked how a person might grieve 
his enemy, answered, “ By doing as well as possible 
himself.” 

CXXVI. 

Let no wise man estrange himself from the govern- 
ment of the state; for it is both wicked to withdraw 
from being useful to the needy, and cowardly to give 
way to the worthless. For it is foolish to choose 
rather to be governed ill than to govern well. 


CXXVII. 

Nothing is more becoming a ruler, than to despise 
no one, nor be insolent, but to preside over all impar- 
tially. 

CXXVIII. 

Any person may live happy in poverty, but few in 
wealth and power. So great is the advantage of pov- 
erty, that no wise man would exchange it for disrepu- 
table wealth ; unless indeed Themistocles, the son of 
Neocles, the most wealthy of the Athenians, but poor 
in virtue, was better than Aristides and Socrates. 
But both himself and his wealth are perished, and 
without a name. For a bad man loses all in death ; 
but virtue is eternal. 


CXXIX. 

[Remember] that such is, and was, and will be, the 
nature of the world, nor is it possible that things 
should be otherwise than they now are; and that not 
only men and other creatures upon earth partake 
of this change and transformation, but diviner things 
also. For indeed even the four elements are trans- 
formed and metamorphosed; and earth becomes wa- 


FRAGMENTS. 427 


ter, and water air, and this again is transformed 
into other things. And the same manner of trans- 
formation happens from things above to those below. 
Whoever endeavors to turn his mind towards these 
points, and persuade himself to receive with willing- 
ness what cannot be avoided, will pass his life in 
moderation and harmony. 


CXXX. 

He who is discontented with things present and 
allotted, is unskilled in life. But he who bears them, 
and the consequences arising from them, nobly and 
rationally, is worthy to be esteemed a good man. 


CXXxXI. 

All things serve and obey the [laws of the] unt- 
verse ; the earth, the sea, the sun, the stars, and the 
plants and animals of the earth. Our body likewise 
obeys the same, in being sick and well, young and 
old, and passing through the other changes decreed. 
It is therefore reasonable that what depends on our- 
selves, that is, our own understanding, should not be 
the only rebel. For the universe is powerful and 
superior, and consults the best for us by governing 
us in conjunction with the whole. And further; 
opposition, besides that it is unreasonable, and pro- 
duces nothing except a vain struggle, throws us into 
pain and sorrows. 


428 ’ FRAGMENTS. 


The following Fragments are ascribed jointly to 
Epictetus and other authors. 


L 


Moderation, as it is a short and agreeable way, 
brings much delight and little trouble. 


IL. 
Fortify yourself with moderation; for this is an 
impregnable fortress. 


IL. 
Prefer nothing to truth, not even the choicest 
friendship, since this borders on those passions by 
which justice is both confounded and darkened. 


Iv. 

Truth is an immortal and an eternal thing. It 
bestows not a beauty which time will wither, nor a 
courage which may quail before a human tribunal ; 
but only things just and lawful, from which it di- 
vides and destroys all that is unjust. 


Vv. 
We should have neither a blunt sword nor a point- 
less speech. 


VI. 


Nature has given man one tongue, but two ears, 
that we may hear twice as much as we speak, 


VII. 


Nothing is in reality.either pleasant or unpleasant 
by nature; but all things become such through habit. 


FRAGMENTS. 429 


VIII. . 
Choose the best life ; for habit will make it pleasant. 


Ix. 
Choose rather to leave your children well instruct- 
ed than rich. For the hopes of the wise are better 
than the riches of the ignorant. 


x. 


A daughter is to a father a possession which is not 
his own. 


XI. 


The same person advised to bequeath modesty to 
children, rather than gold. 


XI. 


The reproof ofa father is an agreeable medicine ; 
for the profit is greater than the pain. 


XU. 


He who is fortunate in a son-in-law, finds a son ; he 
who is unfortunate in one, loses likewise a daughter. 


XIV. 


The worth of instruction, like that of gold, passes 
current in every place. 


XY. 


He who cultivates wisdom cultivates the knowl- 
edge of God. 


XVI. 


There is no creature so beautiful as 2 man adorned 
by instruction. 


430 FRAGMENTS. 


XVII. 
We ought to flee the friendship of the wicked, and 
the enmity of the good. 


XVII. 
Misfortunes test friends, and detect enemies. 


xix. 

We ought to do well by our friends, when they are 
present ; and speak well of them, when they are ab- 
sent. 

Let him not think himself loved by any, who loves 
none. 

XXI. 

We ought to choose, beth for a physician and for a 

friend, not the most agreeable, but the most useful. 


XXii. 


If you would lead a life without sorrow, regard 
things which will happen, as if they had already 
‘happened. 

Xx. 

Be exempt from grief; not like irrational creatures, 
from insensibility, nor from incousiderateness, like 
fools; but like a man of virtue, making reason the 
remedy for grief. 

XXIV. 

They whose minds are the least grieved by calami- 
ties, and who best meet them in action, are the great- 
est both in public and in private life. 


KXY. 
They who are well instructed, like those who are 


FRAGMENTS. 431 


exercised in the Palestra, if they happen to fall quick- 
ly and dexterously rise again from misfortunes. 


XXVI. 


We ought to call in reason, like a good physician, 
to our assistance in misfortune. 


XXXVI. 
Too much intoxication from good fortune, as from 
drinking, makes a fool more senseless. 


XXVIII. 
Envy is the adversary of the fortunate. 


xxix. 
He who remembers what man is, can be discon- 
tented at nothing which ‘happens. 


XXX. 
A pilot and a fair wind are necessary to a happy 
voyage ; reason and art, to a happy life. 


XXXI. 
Of good fortune, as of ripe fruit, we must make the 
most while it lasts. 


XXXII. 
He is unreasonable who quarrels with events which 
happen from natural necessity. 


432 FRAGMENTS. 


The following Fragments are omitted by Mr. Upton; bui 
as they stand under the name of Arrian, and seen 
to be in the spirit of Epictetus, they are added here. 


I. 

* HAT does it signify to me, said he, whether 

the universe is composed of atoms or uncom- 
pounded substances, — or of fire and earth? Is it not 
sufficient to know the essence of good and evil, and 
the proper bounds of the desires and aversions, and 
of the active powers; and by making use of these as 
so many certain rules, to order the conduct of life, 
and let go these things which are above us; which, 
perhaps, are incomprehensible to human understand- 
ing, but if one should suppose them ever so com- 
prehensible, are still of doubtful benefit when com- 
prehended. And must it not be said that he gives 
himself trouble to no purpose who attributes these 
things as essential to the character of a philosopher? 
“ What, then, is the Delphic admonition, Know thy- 
self, superfluous?” “No, surely,” said he. “ What, 
then, does it mean?” If any one should admonish a 
performer in a chorus to know himself, would he not 
take it as a hint to improve his motions ? 


IL. 

+ The same person being asked, “ Wherein do the 
diligent have the advantage of the slothful?” an- 
swered, ‘ Wherein the pious have the advantage of 
the impious : —in good hopes.” 


* Stobseus de Diis. Serm. 211, p. 714, ed. Franeof., 1581. — C. 
+ Maximus, amept tdorovias. Serm. 118, p. 874. —C. 


FRAGMENTS. 433 


Or. 


* Walls give to cities, and education to minds,, 
ornament.and, security. 


IV. 


+ When a young man was giving himself‘ airs in a 
public place, and saying, that’ he had grown wise by 
conversing with many wise men: “I have conversed’ 
too,” answered’ somebody, “with many rich men, but’ 
T have not grown rich.” 


v. 


+ Socrates, being sent for by Archelaus, as design- 
ing to make him a rich man, returned him this an- 
swer: “Four quarts of meal are sold at Athens for 
five denarii, and the fountains run with water. If 
what I have is not sufficient for me, yet I am suff- 
ciently able to make a shift with that; and thus it 
becomes sufficient for me. Do you not perceive that it 
makes no difference in the goodness of Polus’s voice, 
whether he performs the part of Gidipus in his re- 
gal state, or whether he is a wanderer and a beggar 
at Colonus? And shall a brave man appear worse 
than Polus, and not perform well in whatever part is 
imposed upon him by the Deity? Shall he not imi- 
tate Odysseus, who made no worse figure in rags 
than in a fine purple robe?” 


* Ant. and Max. de Disciplind. Serm. 210, p. 704.—C. 

t Ibid. —C. 

$ Stobzus, Compar. Paupertatis et Divitiarum. Serm. 237, p. 
778.— 0. 


434 FRAGMENTS. 


VI. 

* There are some persons who are calmly of a high 
spirit, and do all the same things quietly, and as it 
were without anger, which those do who are hurried 
with strong passion. We are to guard, therefore, 
against the faults of such persons, as being much 
worse than those of violent anger. For people of the 
latter character are quickly satiated with vengeance ; 
whereas the others, like persons in a slow fever, ex- 
tend the excitement over a longer time. 


* Stobwus, Quod Eventus, &e., pp. 824, 329.—C. 


INDEX. 


——. 


We 


! Acapemtes, deny the evidence of | Demetrius, his speech to Nero, 72. 


the senses, 166. 
Adaltery reproved, 102. 
Affection, not incoasistent with rea- 
son, 34—how to be regulated, 274. 
Agrippinus, hie behavior abont his 
trial, 6— hie answer to Florus, 9. 
|4 Anger reproved, 168. 
Antipater, 168, 167, 199. , 
> Appearances to the mind, a right 
use of them in our own -power, 4 
—the standard of action, 80. 
Archedemus, 108, 168, 158, 199. 


2- Beauty, human, consists in human 
excelleace, 190. 

Ds Body dependent on externals, 4, 
248, 802 —clay, 4, 249, 804 — onr 
last garment, 72 — compared to 

ao ass, 301. 


Cantion consistent with courage, 93 
—necessary ia thinge dependent 
on will, 98, 99. 
‘| Character to be preserved, 7, 100. 
Chrysippus, 14, 109, 168, 168, 199, 
241, 277. 
«) Oleanthes, 167, 257, 287, 809, 818, 
325, 899. 
Complaisance, 817. 
4 Common eense, what, 208. 
4} Company a festival, 42. 
Conceit reproved, 124, 148, 229. 
Contentment recommended, 6, 29, 
320, 841. 
Crates, 252. 


& Death to be enconntered cheerfully, 

/ 6—a restitution of what is not 
our own, 7—n0 evil, 30, 68, 77, 
116, 121, 169—a mask, 98—a 
return to the elements, 227, 341 — 
only the separation of soul and 
body, 220, 247, 279 — not terrible, 
877 — to be placed continually he- 
fore our eyes, 383. 


Desires in our own power, 4, 98, 376 
-—are to be restrained by a be- 
gianer in philosophy, 13, 228, 244, 
829, 876. 

Determinations not tobe kept, 189. 

Difficulties, their nse, 67. 

Diffidence, faulty, reproved, 229. 

Diogenee taken for a epy, 68, 248 — 
his answer to one who desired rec- 
ommendatory letters, 101 — taken 
by pirates, 184— his behavior ia 
a fever, 251—hie quiokoess ia 
repartee, 256 — hie love of man, 
274 —hie notion of freedom, 274, 
298, 812, 881. 

Discontent reproved, 21, 42, 142, 
804, 822, 406. 

Discourse, indecent, to he avoided, 


891. 

Distrust in Providence reproved, 29, 
284, 

Divination, ill effects of an nnreason- 
able regard to it, 111 — the proper 
disposition ia applying to it, 388. 

Daty, filial, recommended, 212, 386. 


Edacation, why necessary, 8 — what 
the Stoics meant by it, 96. 
Egotism to be avoided, 391. 
Elocation the gift of God, 177 — use- 
1, but aot ee ao, 180. 
Exivy reproved, 117. 
Epaphroditus, 6, 69, 76. 
Epicurus placed the good of man in 
ody, 62, 68, 200 —forbade mar- 
riage, and the care of children, 
and engaging ia the service of the 
public, 66, 211— denied the nat- 
ural relation of mankiad to each 
other, 162 Prey He irreligion and 
injustice, 164 — did not pronounce 
stealing to be evil, 210 — his prin- 
ciples wicked, 210. 
Error, all, involuntary, 62, 64, 188, 
394. 


436 


Eternals not in our awn power, 65, 
404, 142 — materials for the will, 
83 —not to be treated carelessly, 


104. 
Euphrates, the philosopher, 231, 848. 
Evil consists in a perverted will, 98 
—a mere negation, 886. 


Familiarity to he combined »with 
caution, 282, 817. i 

Fates, 48. 

Fearlessness, 3389. 

Florus, 9. : 

Freedom, 41, 274, 298, 312. fe 

Friendship‘ tobe mtet' with. only in 
prudence and ‘virtue,:171, 406 — 
impeesible:in'a had-man, 171. 


Galba, 235. 

Galileans, 340. 

God the universal: Father.and: Cre- 
ator, 12, 28, 116, 267 — is: omni- 
present and omniscient, 45, 186 — 

“neglects not the : smallest’ things, 
-281— our faculties : arid ‘abilities 
His gift, 22, 177 — wherein -con- 

: sists ‘His essence, '113:'—-makes 
‘revelations to-mankirid,-196 +-the 
‘Author of all we enjoy, 48, ‘I77, 
804 — dependence on Him recom- 
+mended, -161-—to' be thanked for 
the instructions we receive from 
wise and: good men, 17 — for moral 
improvement, 155 — proposed to 
-our ‘imitation. See‘ Irnitation. — 
Made all men te be happy, and 
‘hath ‘put: happiness ‘in’ onr -own 

“power, ‘83, 265 —‘to'be' consulted 
in-our undertakings, 260. 

God. ‘See Zens. 

Gads, different opinions concerning 
‘them, 40. 

Good to be ‘sought: from ‘ourselves, 
88 —the universal motive of ac- 

“tion, 248—in ‘our own power, 
88, 201 — consists in’ will, 91, 141, 
178, 220 — not 'in- externals, 287, 
246. 

Grief; rebellion against God, 265. 


LY 


Health, not a good; 220, 288. 
‘Helvidius’ Priscus, 9. 

Hetmes (rod of), 289. 
‘Hippocrates, 28. 

‘Humility recommended, 890; 408. 


Imitation of God,'186, 147 —- of good 
men, 155, 160, 891. 

‘Amprovement, in what to be cought, 
18, 207. 


INDEX. 


Industry, wherein it coneists, 322. 
Italicus, 215. 


Lateranus, Plantus, 5. 

Laughter restricted, 890. 

Law (divine), what, 145, 221, 271. 

Lesbius, 240. 

-Life-athing indifferent, 108. 

|. Logic,‘its use, 23, 51. 

re consistent only with wiedom, 
171, 


Man, a spectator and interpreter of 
the works of Gad, 19 — not made 
‘ for‘an ‘inactive life, 38 —~his:good 
coneiets in a due régulation of:the 
will, 28, 70 — is~possessed of free 
will, 58, 58 — part of:a'common- 
wealth, 107, 120,°340—~how pre- 
served and: how destroyed, 117 — 
hie end ‘to follow: God;-92 — form- 
ed to change‘his abode, 265 — his 
. nature, geiitle, sociable, arid faith- 
‘fal, 880 man ‘not the master of 
_man,'807. 

Marriage inconsiéstent-with the Gynio 
profession, "252 recommenddd, 
211, 240. 

‘Master, who,‘90,’ 101, 880. 

Maximus, 209. 

‘Money nat a good, 141. 


Neatness recommended, 197, 361. 
Nera, 5, 9. 


Ostentation- reproved,- 224, 228, 259, 
282, 395, 896. 


Patience the gift of ‘God, 21, 143, 


214, 

‘Philosophers, what. they ought’ to 
study, 7, 61, 185, 219 — how treat- 
ed, 128, 215, 888. 

Plato, 28, 148, 155, 413. 

Pleasure nat a good, 126 —- an attend- 
aut on virtue, 210. 

 Polemo, 192. 

Poverty not an evil, 284, 883. 

Prayer recommended, 155,241. 

Principles not dependent on exter- 
‘nals,’ 126 =the supreme rule.of 

~action, 64, 246. 
‘Providence, inetances of ‘its: wiedom 
~and goodness, 49; 805 -— those. in- 
stances proof ofa God, td. — gives 
the best ‘things to the best: men, 
284, 
Psendomencs, 152. 
Pyrrhonists ridiculed, 76. 


KIN 


4 
\ 


- 


INDEX. 


Quarrelling reproved, 827. 


Reason, divine, 68 — contemplates 
itself, 61. 

Resignation recommended, 4, 147, 
304. 


| Revenge reproved, 128. 
| Riches not a good, 406, 407. 
Rufns, 208, 286, 263 — hia answer to 
Thraseas, 6 — to Epictstus, 26. 


Sceptics ridiculed, 738. 

Self-interest the universal motive of 
action, 69 — natoral, 65, 173 — 
a ground of piety, 77, 174, 


Servants, humanity to them, 409. 
Shame (false) reproved, 271, 236. 
Sicknesa not an evil, 289 — no im- 
pediment to the mind, 379. 
Socrates, his resignation to the 
divine will, 16— a citizen of the 
world, 23— hia aepeech to his 
judges, 81, 198, 263 — began by 
the examination of words, 52 — 
always preserved the same coun- 
tenanoe, 78 — forbids an unexam- 
ined life, 76, 224 — his excuse of 
the jailer, 91 — whether he wrote 
anything, 97 — his pleasantry at 
his trial, 105— wrote hymns in 
rison, 111 — made his opponent 
ear witness to him, 127, 189 — 
his chastity, 165 — pever provok- 
ed in a dispute, 128 — never qnar- 
relled, nor suffered others to qnar- 
rel, 827 — author of confutation, 
229 — his modesty, 262, 349 — his 
neatness, 8362 —hia courage, 314 
—in what manner he loved his 
children, 274, 814 — disoheyed the 
thirty tyrants, 314 — died only as 


487 


to his body, 86 — his answer when 
advised to prepare for his trial, 99 
— to Crito, 314. 

Solitude a state of repose and free- 
dom, 42, 8324—to he rendered 
agreeable hy contemplation and 
dependence on God, 226. 

Soul, a portion of the divine es- 
sence, 46, 63, 114 — never willing- 
ly deprived of truth, 79, 176. 

Spartans, 7, 416. 

Superfluities to be avoided, 398. 

Sura, 234. 


Taking paing, 866. 

Thanksgiving recommended, 4, 17, 
40, 60, 177, 206, 321, 841. 

Thraseas, 6. 


Vanity reproved, 878, 894, 897, 406. 

Vespasian, 10. 

Vulgar minds to he avoided, 288, 
890 — difference hetween them 
and a philosopher, 896. 


Will uncontrollable even hy Zeus, 
6 — incapable of restraint, 53, 65, 
287 — in our own hands, 104 — is 
virtue and vice, happiness and 
unhappioess, 178. 

Women, for what to be esteemed, 
393. 


World, a system composed of men 
and God, 29 — one great city, 266, 
273 — has a Governor, 138. 

Worship (divine) recommended, 
212, 287. 


Zeno, 62, 132, 242, 347, 391. 

Zeus, 4, 6, 6, 22, 48, 77, 115, 201, 204, 
218, 222, 226, 260, 265, 267, 267 
309, 360. 


THE END. 


Cambridge : Stereotyped and Printed by Welch, Bigelow, & Ca, 


ornell Universit 


"ia 





